 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper we present the Yale-CMU-Berkeley 
(YCB) Object and Model set, intended to be used to facilitate 
benchmarking in robotic manipulation, prosthetic design and 
rehabilitation research. The objects in the set are designed to 
cover a wide range of aspects of the manipulation problem; it 
includes objects of daily life with different shapes, sizes, 
textures, weight and rigidity, as well as some widely used 
manipulation tests. The associated database provides high-
resolution RGBD scans, physical properties, and geometric 
models of the objects for easy incorporation into manipulation 
and planning software platforms. In addition to describing the 
objects and models in the set along with how they were chosen 
and derived, we provide a framework and a number of example 
task protocols, laying out how the set can be used to 
quantitatively evaluate a range of manipulation approaches 
including planning, learning, mechanical design, control, and 
many others. A comprehensive literature survey on existing 
benchmarks and object datasets is also presented and their 
scope and limitations are discussed. The set will be freely 
distributed to research groups worldwide at a series of tutorials 
at robotics conferences, and will be otherwise available at a 
reasonable purchase cost. It is our hope that the ready 
availability of this set along with the ground laid in terms of 
protocol templates will enable the community of manipulation 
researchers to more easily compare approaches as well as 
continually evolve benchmarking tests as the field matures.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
Benchmarks are crucial for the progress of a research 
field, allowing performance to be quantified in order to give 
insight into the effectiveness of an approach. In manipulation 
research, particularly in robotic manipulation, prosthetic 
design and rehabilitation, benchmarking and performance 
metrics are challenging due largely to the enormous breadth 
of the application and task space for which researchers are 
working towards. The majority of research groups have 
therefore selected for themselves a set of objects and/or tasks 
that they believe are representative of the functionality that 
they would like to achieve/assess. Unfortunately such an 
approach prevents the analysis of experimental results against 
a common basis, and therefore makes it difficult to 
quantitatively interpret the performance of the described 
approach. Object and model sets are generally the 
fundamental 
elements 
involved 
in 
benchmarks 
for 
 
 
Funding for this work was provided in part by the National Science 
Foundation, grants IIS- 0953856, IIS-1139078, and IIS-1317976.  
B. Calli and A. Dollar are with the Department of Mechanical 
Engineering and Materials Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 
(203-436-9122; e-mail: {berk.calli; aaron.dollar}@yale.edu).  
A. Singh and P. Abbeel are with the Department of Computer Science, 
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA (e-mail: 
arjun810@gmail.com; pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu). 
A. Walsman and S. Srinivasa are with the Robotics Institute, Carnegie 
Mellon 
University, 
Pittsburgh, 
PA, 
USA 
(e-mail:  
aaronwalsman@gmail.com; ss5@andrew.cmu.edu). 
 
manipulation. Substantial effort has already been put into 
providing mesh model databases of objects (e.g. [1-4] with a 
thorough overview provided in section II), generally for 
object recognition or planning purposes. There have, 
however, been very few instances of proposed object/task sets 
for which the physical objects are available to researchers. 
Access to the objects is crucial to performance benchmarking 
as many aspects of the manipulation process cannot be 
modeled, thereby requiring experiments to demonstrate 
success or examine failure modes. 
In this paper, we present an object set for manipulation 
research in the fields of robotics, prosthetic design and 
rehabilitation, a framework for standard task protocols, and a 
number of example protocols along with experimental 
implementation of them. The object set is specifically 
designed to allow for widespread dissemination of the 
physical objects and manipulation scenarios selected based on 
a survey of the most common objects utilized in research in 
the target fields along with a number of additional practical 
constraints. Along with the physical objects, textured mesh 
models and high quality images are provided together with 
their physical properties to enable realistic simulations. These 
models are integrated into the MoveIt motion planning tool 
[5] and the ROS manipulation stack. The set will be freely 
distributed to research groups worldwide at a series of 
tutorials at robotics conferences, and will be otherwise 
available at a reasonable purchase cost. Our goal is to do as 
much as possible to facilitate the widespread usage of a 
common set of objects and tasks in order to allow easy 
comparison of results between research groups worldwide.  
In choosing the set of objects and data provided, a number 
of issues were considered. The objects should span a variety 
of shapes, sizes, weight, rigidity and texture, as well as span a 
wide range of manipulation applications and challenges. Still, 
several practical constraints must be considered, including the 
number and size of the objects to allow for easy shipping and 
storage, keeping the overall cost reasonable, providing objects 
that are durable so as to not substantially degrade over time or 
with usage, as well as to choose objects that are likely to be 
available in a similar form in the future. Preliminary data in 
the repository includes high-resolution 3D point cloud data 
with associated meshes and texture (visual) information, 
object mechanical properties such as major dimensions and 
mass, as well as models for integration into planning and 
simulation 
software, 
all 
available 
at: 
http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb/. 
In addition to the object and model set, we provide a 
systematic approach to define manipulation protocols and 
benchmarks using the set. Guidelines for designing well-
defined manipulation protocols and benchmarks are provided 
through a template for easy protocol and benchmark design. 
Furthermore, using this template, example protocols and 
benchmarks are derived for the assessment of various aspects 
of robotic manipulation i.e. mechanical design, manipulation 
planning, dexterity and learning. The implementation of these 
Benchmarking in Manipulation Research: The YCB Object and 
Model Set and Benchmarking Protocols 
Berk Calli, Member, IEEE, Aaron Walsman, Student Member, Arjun Singh, Student Member, IEEE,  
IEEE, Siddhartha Srinivasa, Senior Member, IEEE, Pieter Abbeel, Senior Member, IEEE, and Aaron 
M. Dollar, Senior Member, IEEE 


 
benchmarks on real robotic systems are also provided to 
demonstrate the benchmarks’ abilities to quantitatively 
evaluate the manipulation capabilities of various systems. 
We expect to continually expand this work by including 
additional data on the objects (i.e. inertial properties), by 
proposing additional benchmarks for manipulation, but more 
importantly, by creating a web portal for the user community 
to engage in this effort, proposing changes to the object set 
and putting forth their own protocols and benchmarks, among 
others.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: First 
a comprehensive literature survey on object sets and 
benchmarks is presented in Section II. Following that our 
object set is presented and explained in Section III. In Section 
IV, guidelines are provided for designing protocols and 
benchmarks. In Section V, the example protocols and 
benchmarks are presented. The paper is concluded with 
discussions and future work in Section VI. 
II. RELATED WORK 
For benchmarking in manipulation, specifying an object 
set is essential. Table 1 summarizes the object sets proposed 
in prior work. Even though there are a large number of 
efforts that provide datasets of object mesh models which are 
useful for many simulation and planning applications, as well 
as for benchmarking in shape retrieval, these datasets have 
limited utility for manipulation benchmarking due to several 
reasons: First, since most of them are not designed 
specifically for manipulation benchmarking, the selected 
objects do not usually cover the shape and function variety 
needed for a range of manipulation experiments. Second, 
none of these databases provide the objects’ physical 
properties, which are necessary to conduct realistic 
simulations. Lastly and perhaps most importantly, the vast 
majority of objects in these sets are not easily accessible by 
other researchers, preventing their use in experimental work.  
Exceptions to this include [6], which provides an online 
shopping list (but it is outdated with many dead links), the 
recently-announced Amazon Picking Challenge [7], which 
provides a shopping list to purchase objects meant for a 
narrow bin-picking task, and commercial kits available for 
some rehabilitation-focused tests [8-11] that provide limited 
set of objects but are not representative of a wide range of 
manipulation tasks. The current effort is unique in that it 
provides a large amount of information about the objects 
necessary for many simulation and planning approaches, 
makes the actual objects readily available for researchers to 
utilize experimentally, and includes a wide range of objects 
to span many different manipulation applications. 
In the following sections, we provide a detailed overview 
of prior related benchmarking efforts, discussing their scope 
and limitations. For organization purposes, we first discuss 
work primarily related to robotic manipulation (including 
vision 
and 
learning 
applications), 
then 
efforts 
in 
rehabilitation, including prosthetics. 
A. Robotic Manipulation: 
The necessity of manipulation benchmarks is highly 
recognized in the robotics community [12-14] and continues 
to be an active topic of discussion at workshops on robotic 
manipulation (e.g. [15]). As mentioned earlier, the majority 
of prior work related to object sets has involved just the 
models and images of those objects (with varying degrees of 
information, from purely shape information to textural plus 
shape), often created for research in computer vision (e.g. [2, 
16, 17]). There have also been a number of shape/texture sets 
designed for/by the robotics community, particularly for 
applications such as planning and learning. The Columbia 
Grasp Database (CGD) [3] rearranges the object models of 
the Princeton Shape Benchmark (PSB) [18] for robotic 
manipulation and provides mesh models of 8000 objects 
together with assigned successful grasps per model. Such a 
database is especially useful for implementing machine 
learning-based grasp synthesis algorithms in which large 
amounts of labeled data are required for training the system. 
A multi-purpose object set which also targets manipulation is 
the KIT Object Models Database [19] which provides stereo 
images and textured mesh models of 100 objects. While there 
are a large number of objects, the shape variety is limited, 
and like the previously mentioned datasets, the objects are 
not easily accessible to other researchers.  
There have only been two robotics-related efforts in which 
the objects are made relatively available. The household 
objects list [6] provides good shape variety that is 
appropriate for manipulation benchmarking, as well as a 
shopping list for making the objects more easily accessible to 
researchers. Unfortunately, the list is outdated, and most 
objects are not available anymore. Also, the 3D models of 
the objects are not supplied which prevents the use of the 
object set in simulations. Very recently, the Amazon Picking 
Challenge [7] also provides a shopping list for items, but 
those were chosen specific to the bin-picking application and 
do not have models associated with them.  
In terms of other robotic manipulation benchmarking 
efforts, a number of simulation tools have been presented in 
the literature. The OpenGRASP benchmarking suite [20] 
presents a simulation framework for robotic manipulation. 
The benchmarking suite provides test cases and setups, and a 
standard evaluation scheme for the simulation results. So far, 
a benchmark for grasping known objects has been presented 
using this suite. VisGraB [21] provides a benchmark 
framework for grasping unknown objects. The unique feature 
of this software is utilizing real stereo images of the target 
objects for grasp synthesis, and executing and evaluating the 
result in a simulation environment. For gripper and hand 
design, benchmark tests [22, 23] are proposed for evaluating 
the ability of the grippers to hold an object, but only 
cylindrical objects are used. 
 


 
Table I: Object Datasets in Literature (Sorted by Year) 
 
Dataset name 
Year 
Data Type 
Purpose 
Object 
number / 
Category 
Physical 
objects 
available
? 
Website 
1 
BigBIRD [1] 
2014 
Meshes with 
texture + HQ 
images 
Object 
recognition 
100 
No 
http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/bigbird  
2 
Amazon Picking 
Challenge [7] 
2014 
Shopping list 
Grasping 
27 
Yes 
http://amazonpickingchallenge.org/ 
3 
SHREC'14 [2] 
2014 
Mesh models 
Object 
retrieval 
8987 / 
171 
No 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/vug/sharp/contest/
2014/Generic3D/ 
4 
SHREC'12 [24] 
2012 
Mesh models 
Object 
retrieval 
1200 / 60 
No 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/vug/sharp/contest/
2012/Generic3D/ 
5 
The KIT object 
models database 
[19] 
2012 
Mesh with 
texture, 
stereo images 
Recognition, 
localization 
and 
manipulation 
100 
No 
http://i61p109.ira.uka.de/ObjectModelsWebU
I/ 
6 
VisGraB [21] 
2012 
Stereo 
images 
Manipulation 
18 
No 
http://www.robwork.dk/visgrab/ 
7 
The Object 
Segmentation 
Database [17] 
2012 
RGB-D 
images 
Object 
segmentation 
N/A 
No 
http://users.acin.tuwien.ac.at/arichtsfeld/?site
=4 
8 
Toyohashi shape 
benchmark [25] 
2012 
Mesh models 
Object 
retrieval 
10k / 352 
No 
http://www.kde.cs.tut.ac.jp/benchmark/tsb/  
9 
The Willow 
Garage Object 
Recognition 
Challenge [26] 
2012 
RGB-D 
images 
Object 
recognition 
N/A 
No 
http://www.acin.tuwien.ac.at/forschung/v4r/m
itarbeiterprojekte/willow/ 
10 
SHREC'11 [27] 
2011 
Mesh models 
Object 
retrieval 
600  
No 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/vug/sharp/contest/
2011/NonRigid/ 
11 
Berkeley 3-D 
Object Dataset 
[28] 
2011 
RGB-D 
dataset of 
room scenes 
Object 
detection  
N/A 
No 
http://kinectdata.com/ 
12 
RGB-D Object 
Dataset [29] 
2011 
RGB-D 
dataset 
Object 
detection and 
recognition 
300 / 51  No 
http://rgbd-dataset.cs.washington.edu/ 
13 
The 
OpenGRASP 
benchmarking 
suite [20] 
2011 
Mesh with 
texture, 
stereo images 
Grasping 
Uses 
KIT 
database 
No 
http://opengrasp.sourceforge.net/benchmarks.
html 
14 
SHREC’10 [30] 
2010 
Mesh models 
Object 
retrieval 
 3168 / 
43 
No 
http://tosca.cs.technion.ac.il/book/shrec_robus
tness2010.html 
15 
The Columbia 
Grasp Database 
[3] 
2009 
Mesh models 
Grasping 
~8000 
No 
http://grasping.cs.columbia.edu/ 
16 
Benchmark Set 
of Domestic 
Objects [6] 
2009 
Shopping list 
Robotic 
manipulation 
43 
Yes 
http://www.hsi.gatech.edu/hrl/object_list_v09
2008.shtml 
17 
Bonn 
Architecture 
Benchmark [31] 
2009 
Mesh models 
Object 
retrieval 
2257 
No 
ftp://ftp.cg.cs.uni-
bonn.de/pub/outgoing/ArchitectureBenchmar
k 
18 
Engineering 
Shape 
Benchmark [32] 
2008 
Mesh models 
Object 
retrieval 
867 
No 
https://engineering.purdue.edu/PRECISE/shre
c08 
19 
[3D Object 
Retrieval 
Benchmark] [33] 
2008 
Mesh models 
Object 
retrieval 
800 / 40 
No 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/vug/sharp/benchm
ark/ 
20 
McGill 3D 
Shape 
Benchmark [34] 
2008 
Mesh models 
Shape 
retrieval 
N/A 
No 
http://www.cim.mcgill.ca/~shape/benchMark/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
The Toronto 
Rehabilitation 
Institute Hand 
Function Test 
[35] 
2008 
Commercial 
Kit / No 
model data 
Prosthetics 
and 
Rehabilitation 
14 
No 
http://www.rehabmeasures.org/Lists/RehabM
easures/PrintView.aspx?ID=1044  
22 
GRASSP [9] 
2007 
Commercial 
Kit / No 
model data 
Prosthetics 
and 
Rehabilitation 
N/A 
Yes 
http://grassptest.com/  
23 
AIM@SHAPE 
Shape 
Repository [16] 
2006 
Mesh models 
General 
1180  
No 
http://shapes.aim-at-
shape.net/viewmodels.php 
24 
The Princeton 
Shape 
Benchmark [18] 
2004 
Mesh models 
Shape-based 
retrieval 
1,814 
No 
http://shape.cs.princeton.edu/benchmark/ 
25 
[Mesh 
Deformation 
Dataset] [36] 
2004 
Mesh models 
Mesh 
transformation 
N/A / 13  No 
http://people.csail.mit.edu/sumner/research/de
ftransfer/data.html  
26 
NTU 3D model 
benchmark [37] 
2003 
Mesh models 
Shape 
retrieval 
1,833 
No 
http://3d.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ 
27 
SHAP [8] 
2002 
Commercial 
Kit / No 
model data 
Prosthetics  
and 
Rehabilitation 
- 
Yes 
http://www.shap.ecs.soton.ac.uk/  
28 
Action Research 
Arm Test [10] 
1981 
Commercial 
Kit / No 
model data 
Prosthetics 
and 
Rehabilitation 
19 
Yes 
http://saliarehab.com/actionresearcharmtestar
at.html  
29 
Jebsen-Taylor 
Hand Function 
Test [11] 
1969 
Commercial 
Kit / No 
model data 
Prosthetics 
and 
Rehabilitation 
N/A 
Yes 
N/A 
30 
The ITI database 
[38] 
N/A 
Mesh models 
Object 
retrieval 
544 / 13 
No 
http://vcl.iti.gr/3d-object-retrieval/ 
31 
Model Bank 
Library [39] 
N/A 
Mesh with 
texture 
General 
1200 
No 
http://digimation.com/3d-libraries/model-
bank-library/ 
32 
SketchUp [4] 
N/A 
Mesh with 
and w/o 
texture 
General 
N/A 
No 
https://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com/  
33 
Robocup 
@home [40] 
Multi. 
no data 
Manipulation 
N/A 
No 
http://www.robocupathome.org/ 


 
B. Prosthetics and Rehabilitation 
In the general field of rehabilitation, including 
prosthetics, there are a number of evaluation tools used by 
therapists to attempt to quantify upper-limb function. Some 
of these are common, commercially-available, and have 
been substantially published on, including “normative” data 
to compare the patient’s performance to others. Other tests 
have only been proposed in the literature and not (yet, at 
least) widely utilized.  
The tests that have a commercial setup available are Box 
and Blocks Test [41], 9-hole-peg test [42], Jebsen-Taylor 
Hand Function Test [11], Action Research Arm Test 
(ARAT) [10], the Southampton Hand Assessment Procedure 
(SHAP) [8] and Graded Redefined Assessment of Strength, 
Sensibility and Prehension (GRASSP) test [9]. The setups 
for Box and Blocks Test and 9-hole-peg tests are very 
specific for these protocols, including timed movements of 
simple objects. The setup for Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function 
Test also consists of quite limited set of objects that are 
specific to limited tasks. ARAT assesses upper limb function 
and its commercial set [43] contain objects such as wooden 
blocks of various sizes, glasses, a stone, a marble, washers 
and bolts. The test proposes actions like placing a washer 
over a bolt and pouring water from a glass to another. Again, 
this set is far from providing an adequate object variety for 
deriving manipulation benchmarks. GRASSP measure has 
been proposed for the assessment of upper limb impairment. 
This measure is based on a commercial kit available in [44]. 
Apart from a specialized manipulation setup, the kit also 
includes 9-hole peg test, jars and a bottle. The SHAP setup 
includes some objects of daily living such as a bowl, a drink 
carton, and a jar, together with some geometrical shapes, for 
which subjects are requested to do a variety of manipulation 
tasks, including pouring the drink, opening the jar etc. 
Despite enabling a larger possibility of manipulation tasks 
than the previously mentioned setups, the GRASSP and 
SHAP setups are still bounded to a limited number of tasks, 
and both are pricey. 
Some well-known tests that do not provide a commercial 
setup are Grasp and Release Test [45], The Toronto 
Rehabilitation Institute Hand Function Test [35] and 
Activities Measure for Upper Limp Amputees (AM-ULA) 
[46]. The Grasp and Release Test is proposed for evaluating 
the performance of neuroprosthetic hands. For this test, 
detailed descriptions of the objects are given, but these 
objects are not easily obtainable, and the set includes an 
outdated object i.e. a videotape. The Toronto Rehabilitation 
Institute Hand Function Test (also known as Rehabilitation 
Engineering Laboratory Hand Function Test [47]) evaluates 
palmer (power) and lateral (precision) grasp abilities of 
individuals by using an object set consist of a mug, a book, a 
paper, a soda can, dices, a pencil etc. Even though it is 
claimed that the objects used in this test are easily 
obtainable, maintaining the exact object definition is hard 
and one of the objects is an outdated cellular phone. AM-
ULA defines several quality measures for assessing the 
manipulation tasks, and various daily activities are proposed 
for the assessment. The objects used in these activities are 
not standardized. 
In addition to these test, some works in literature use their 
own setups for assessment. In [48], tasks such as “use a 
hammer and nail”, “stir a bowl”, “fold a bath towel”, “use a 
key in a lock” are proposed for evaluating upper limb 
prosthesis. In [49], the performance of the neuroprosthesis 
are evaluated by asking the patient to perform grasping and 
lifting tasks, as well as phone dialing, pouring liquid from a 
pitcher and using spoon and fork. In [50], for evaluating the 
outcomes of a protocol for stoke rehabilitation, blocks, Lego 
and pegs are used together with daily life activities like 
folding, buttoning, pouring and lifting. In [51], the outcomes 
of the neuroprosthesis are measured with Box and Blocks 
Test and Clothes Pin Relocation Task together with the 
evaluation of actions of daily living i.e. using a fork and a 
knife, opening a jar, stirring a spoon in a bowl. In none of 
the abovementioned assessment procedures, the descriptions 
of the objects are provided, however. 
In our object set, we have included the objects that are 
commonly used in these assessment procedures (i.e. a mug, 
a bowl, a pitcher, washers, bolts, kitchen inventories, pens, 
key-padlock etc.). We also included objects that will allow 
designing protocols which focus on activities of daily living. 
Moreover, widely used manipulation tests such as 9-hole 
peg, box and blocks and clothes peg allocation are also 
provided. 
III. THE OBJECT AND DATA SET 
The proposed object set can be seen in Figures 1-7 and 
listed in Table I. In this section, we describe the object set 
and the reasoning behind the choices (section III.A), a 
description of the process and data involved in the scans of 
the objects (III.B), and the models and integration into 
simulation and planning packages (III.C) and a brief 
functional demonstration (III.D).  
A. Objects 
We aimed to choose objects that are frequently used in 
daily life, and went through the literature to take into 
account the objects that are frequently used in simulations 
and experiments. We also benefit from the studies on objects 
of daily living [52] and daily activities checklist such as 
[53]. 
In compiling the proposed object and task set, we needed 
to take a number of additional practical issues into 
consideration: 


 
 
 
Fig. 1: Food items in the YCB Object Set: back row: coffee can, 
cereal box, cracker box, chips can, box of sugar; middle row: 
mustard container, chocolate pudding box, tomato soup can, gelatin 
box, potted meat can; front: plastic fruit (lemon, apple, pear, 
orange, banana, peach, strawberries, plum). 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: Kitchen items in the YCB Object Set: back row: pitcher, 
plastic wine glass, abrasive sponge, glass cleaner; front: enamel-
coated metal dishware (bowl, coffee mug and plate), eating utensils 
(knife, spoon, and fork), cooking skillet with glass lid, plastic turner. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3: Tool items in the YCB Object Set: back: wood blocks (four 
items, three sizes), power drill; front: nails (three sizes), hammer, 
plastic bolt and nut; adjustable wrench, wood screw, phillips and 
flat screwdrivers, padlock and keys, spring clamps (five sizes), 
scissors, markers (three sizes/types). 
 
 
 
Fig. 4: Shape items in the YCB Object Set: back: stacking blocks 
(set of 10), credit card blank, foam bricks (set of 3), spherical 
objects (softball, tennis ball, racquetball, golf ball, marble 
assortment); front: plastic chain, nylon rope, washer assortment (7 
sizes), dice (set of 12). 
 Variety: In order to cover as many aspects of robotic 
manipulation as possible, we included objects that have a 
wide variety of shape, size, transparency, deformability, 
and texture. Grasping and manipulation difficulty was 
also a criterion: for instance, some objects in the set are 
well approximated by simple geometric shapes and 
relatively easy for grasp synthesis and execution, while 
other objects have higher shape complexity and more 
challenging for grasp synthesis and execution.  
 Use: We included objects that are not only interesting 
for grasping, but also have a range of manipulation uses. 
For example, a pitcher and a cup; nails and a hammer; 
pegs, cloths and rope. We also included “assembly” 
items/tasks: a set of children’s stacking cups, a toy 
airplane (Fig. 6) that must be assembled and screwed 
together and Lego (Fig. 7). Additionally, widely used 
standard manipulation tests in rehabilitation, such as the 
box and blocks [41] and 9-hole-peg test [42], are 
included. As above, these tasks are intended to span a 
wide range of difficulty, from relatively easy to very 
difficult. Furthermore, the ability to quantify task 
performance was also prioritized, including aspects such 
as level of difficulty, time-to-completion, and success 
rate, among others.  
 Durability: We aimed for objects that can be useful long 
term, and therefore avoid objects that are fragile or 
perishable. Also, to increase the longevity of the object 
set, we chose the objects that are likely to remain in 
circulation and change relatively little in the near future. 
 Cost: We aimed to keep the cost of the object set as low 
as possible to broaden accessibility. We therefore selected 
standard consumer products, rather than, for instance, 
custom-fabricated objects and tests. Current cost for the 
objects is approximately $350. 
 Portability: We aimed to have an object set that fits in a 
large-sized suitcase and be below the normal airline 
weight limit (22kg) in order to allow easy shipping and 
storage. 
After considering these practical issues and reviewing the 
literature, the final objects were selected (Table II, Figs. 1-
7). The objects in the set can be divided into the following 
categories: food items, kitchen items, tool items, shape 
items, task items. Objects from ID 1 to 19 are the food items, 
containing real boxed and canned items, as well as wooden 
fruits of complex shapes. The objects from ID 20 to 33 are 
kitchen items, containing objects for food preparation and 


 
Table II (cont): Object Set Items and Properties 
ID 
Class 
Object 
Mass 
Dims. (mm) 
39 
Tool Items 
Padlock  
208g 
24 x 47 x 65 
40 
Hammer 
688g 
32 x 40 x 160 
41 
Nails 
[2,2.7,4.8] g 
[4x25, 3x53, 4x63] 
42 
Phillips 
Screwdriver 
70g 
23 x 198 
43 
Flat 
Screwdriver 
70g 
23 x 198 
44 
Adjustable 
Wrench 
247g 
10 x 26 x 204 
45 
2x4 Wood 
block 
414g 
38 x 90 x 300 
46 
4x4 Wood 
block, long 
1720g 
90 x 90 x 410 
47 
4x4 Wood 
block, short 
638 
90 x 90 x 152 
48 
XS Clamp 
8.3g 
50 x 65 x 11 
49 
S Clamp 
30g 
80 x 91 x 25 
50 
M Clamp 
59g 
90 x 115 x 27 
51 
L Clamp 
125g 
125 x 165 x 32 
52 
XL Clamp 
202g 
165 x 213 x 37 
53 
Power Drill 
895g 
35 x 46 x 184 
54 
Shape Items 
Credit Card 
blank 
5.2g 
54 x 85 x 1 
55 
Soft Ball 
191g 
96 
56 
Tennis Ball 
58g 
64.7 
57 
Racquetball 
41g 
55.3 
58 
Golf Ball 
46g 
42.7 
59 
S Marble 
3.6g 
14 
60 
M Marble 
5.3g 
16 
61 
L Marble 
20g 
24.7 
62 
XL Marble 
59g 
35.2 
63 
Cups 
[13,14,17,19,
21,26,28,31,3
5,38] g 
[55x60, 60x62, 
65x64, 70x66, 
75x68, 80x70, 
85x72, 90x74, 
95x76, 100x78] 
64 
Foam Brick 
28g  
50 x 75 x 50 
65 
Dice 
5.2g 
16.2 
66 
Washers 
[0.1,0.7,1.1,3
,5.3,19,48] g 
[6.4, 10, 13.3, 18.8, 
25.4, 37.3, 51]  
67 
Rope 
20g 
6.4 x 1440 
68 
Chain 
100g 
2 x 4 x 130 
69 
Task Items 
Clear Box 
302g 
292 x 429 x 149 
70 
Box Lid 
159g 
292 x 429 x 20 
71 
Colored 
Wood Blocks 
10.8g 
26 
72 
9-Peg-Hole 
Test 
1435g 
1150 x 1200 x 1200 
73 
Toy Airplane 
570g 
171 x 266 x 280 
 
Table II: Object Set Items and Properties 
ID 
Class 
Object 
Mass 
Dims. (mm) 
1 
Food items 
Cereal Box 
510g 
80  x 195 x 295 
2 
Cracker Box 
453g 
60 x 160 x 230 
3 
Sugar Box 
514g 
38 x 89 x 175 
4 
Pudding Box 
187g 
35 x 110 x 89 
5 
Gelatin Box 
97g 
28 x 85 x 73 
6 
Potted Meat 
Can 
370g 
50 x 97 x 82 
7 
Master Chef 
Can 
414g 
102 x 139  
8 
Tuna fish 
can 
171g 
85 x 33 
9 
Chips Can 
205g 
75 x 250  
10 
Mustard 
Bottle 
431g 
50 x 85 x 175 
11 
Tomato 
Soup Can 
349g 
66 x 101  
12 
Banana 
66g 
36 x 190  
13 
Strawberry 
18g 
43.8 x 55 
14 
Apple 
68g 
75 
15 
Lemon 
29g 
54 x 68  
16 
Peach 
33g 
59 
17 
Pear 
49g 
66.2 x 100 
18 
Orange 
47g 
73 
19 
Plum 
25g 
52 
20 
Kitchen Items 
Windex 
Bottle 
1022g 
80 x 105 x 270 
21 
Sponge 
6.2g 
72 x 114 x 14 
22 
Pitcher Base 
178g 
108 x 235 
23 
Pitcher Lid 
66g 
123 x 48 
24 
Plate 
279g 
258 x 24 
25 
Bowl 
147g 
159 x 53 
26 
Fork 
34g 
14 x 20 x 198 
27 
Spoon 
30g 
14 x 20 x 195 
28 
Knife 
31g 
14 x 20 x 215 
29 
Slotted 
Turner 
105g 
25 x 35 x 410 
30 
Wine glass 
133g 
89 x 137 
31 
Mug 
118g 
80 x 82 
32 
Skillet 
950g 
270 x 25 x 30  
33 
Skillet Lid 
652g 
270 x 10 x 22 
34 
Tool Items 
Scissors 
82g 
87 x 200 x 14 
35 
Permanent 
Marker 
10g 
11.5 x 137 
36 
S Erasable 
Marker 
8.3g 
10.5 x 136 
37 
L Erasable 
Marker 
16g 
19 x 119 
38 
Keys 
6g 
23 x 43 x 2.2 
 
serving, as well as glass cleaner and a sponge. The objects 
from 34 to 53 form the tool category, containing not only 
common tools, but also items such as nails, screws, and 
wood to utilize them. The shape items are from ID 54 to 68, 
which span a range of sizes (spheres, cups, and washers), as 
well as compliant objects such as foam bricks, rope, and 
chain. The manipulation task items are the objects with IDs 
69 to 73, and include two widely used tasks in rehabilitation 
benchmarking (box-and-blocks [41] and 9-hole peg test 
[42]) as well as a simple and a complex assembly task (Lego 
and children’s airplane toy respectively). We also include a 
timer in the kit, which not only provides accurate timing of 
the task, but also can specify the initial position of the hand 
at the beginning of the task execution. 
While there are an unlimited number of manipulation 
tasks that might be able to be done with these objects, we 
provide some examples for each category in Table III (with 
in-depth discussion of tasks and protocols in Section IV). 
 
 


 
    
 
Fig. 5: (left) Box-and-blocks test objects: set of 100 wooden cubes, 
two containers and height obstacle (container lid) between them. 
(right) 9-hole peg test: wooden pegs are placed in  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6: Assembly object: toy airplane disassembled (left), including 
toy power screwdriver, and fully assembled (right). 
 
 
 
Fig. 7: Assembly object: Lego pieces. 
B. Scans 
In order to ease adoption, we collect visual data that is 
commonly required for grasping algorithms and generate 3D 
models for use in simulation. We use the scanning rig used 
to collect the BigBIRD dataset [1]. The rig, shown in Fig. 8, 
has 5 RGBD sensors and 5 high-resolution RGB cameras 
arranged in a quarter-circular arc. Each object is placed on a 
computer-controlled turntable, which is rotated by 3 degrees 
at a time, yielding 120 turntable orientations. Together, this 
yields 600 RGBD images and 600 high-resolution RGB 
images. The process is completely automated, and the total 
collection time for each object is under 5 minutes. 
We then use Poisson surface reconstruction to generate 
watertight meshes. Afterwards, we project the meshes onto 
each image to generate segmentation masks. Note that 
Poisson reconstruction fails on certain objects with missing 
depth data; specifically, transparent or reflective regions of 
objects usually do not register depth data. We will later 
provide better models for these objects using algorithms that 
take advantage of the high-resolution RGB images for 
building models. 
In total, for each object, we provide: 
 
600 RGBD images 
 
600 high-resolution RGB images 
 
Segmentation masks for each image 
 
Calibration information for each image 
 
Texture-mapped 3D mesh models 
The object scans can be found at [54].  
C. Models 
Based on the scans of the objects, there are several ways 
in which object models can be easily integrated into a variety 
of robot simulation packages. For example, in the MoveIt [5] 
simulation package, the mesh can be used as a collision 
object directly. Furthermore, a Unified Robot Description 
Format (URDF) file can be automatically constructed to 
integrate with ROS [55]. This provides a way of specifying 
mass properties, and can link to alternate representations of 
the mesh for visualization and collision. Integration with the 
OpenRAVE [56] simulation package is similarly straight-
forward where we link to the display and collision meshes 
from a KinBody XML file. Using the scans, we have created 
URDF and KinBody files for all of the objects in the dataset, 
provided alongside the scans at [54].   
Once in a simulation environment, a variety of motion 
planners and optimizers can use these models either as 
collision or manipulation objects. Some algorithms, such as 
CHOMP [57], require signed-distance fields to avoid 
collisions which can be computed from the included 
Table III Suggestions for Manipulation Tasks 
Object 
Category 
Suggested Tasks 
Food items 
 Packing/unpacking the groceries. 
Kitchen items 
 Table setting, 
 Wipe down table with sponge 
and Windex, 
 Cooking scenarios. 
Tool items 
 Nailing, 
 Drilling, 
 Unlocking the pad using the key, 
 Placing the pegs on the rope. 
 Unscrewing a bolt using the 
wrench, 
 Cutting a paper with the scissors, 
 Writing on a paper. 
 Screwing the nut on the bolt. 
Shape items 
 Sorting marbles into the plastic 
blocks, 
 Unstacking/stacking the cups, 
 Placing the washers onto the 
bolt. 
Other items 
 Box and blocks test, 
 Toy plane assembly/disassembly, 
 9-peg hole tests, 
 Lego assembly/disassembly. 


 
 
 
Fig. 8: BigBIRD Object Scanning Rig: the box contains a computer-
controlled turntable. 
 
      
 
 
Fig. 9: Point cloud and textural data overlays on two YCB objects: 
mustard bottle and power drill. 
watertight meshes. In other cases such as CBiRRT [58] 
compute collisions directly using an optimized mesh collision 
checker. 
In many cases, collision checking is a computational 
bottleneck for motion planning. Execution time can be 
reduced using a simplified mesh produced either by hand or 
with automatic decimation methods [59]. We have not yet 
provided simplified meshes in this dataset, but view this as an 
opportunity in future work to further explore mesh 
approximation algorithms and their impact on motion 
planning problems using the standardized benchmarks. 
D. Functional Demonstration 
Fig. 10 demonstrates the entire pipeline. Here, we see the 
HERB robot [60] preparing to grasp the virtual drill object. 
This demonstration uses an integration of ROS and 
OpenRAVE. ROS is used to provide communication 
between the various hardware and software components of 
the robot, while OpenRave handles planning and collision 
checking.
 
Inside OpenRAVE, the HERB robot uses CBiRRT, the 
OMPL [61] library and CHOMP to plan and optimize 
motion trajectories. Using these tools, chains of several 
actions can be executed in sequence. The simulation 
environment also provides a mechanism for incorporating 
feedback from perception systems, which similarly benefit 
from this dataset. The provided images, meshes and physical 
objects can all be used as training data for various object 
detection and pose estimation algorithms, which can then be 
incorporated into the manipulation pipeline. 
Access to both the physical object and a corresponding 
model for simulation is important for developing and testing 
new planning and manipulation algorithms. This dataset 
vastly reduced the time required to set up this example by 
providing access to objects and meshes that have already 
been prepared for this purpose. This removed the burden of 
scanning or modeling new objects and provides benchmark 
environments that streamline experimental design. 
IV. PROTOCOL DESIGN FOR MANIPULATION 
A standard set of objects and associated models are a 
great starting point for common replicable research and 
benchmarking in manipulation, but there must be a sufficient 
amount of specification about what should be done with the 
objects in order to directly compare approaches and results. 
Given the wide range of technical interests, research 
approaches, and applications being examined in the 
manipulation research community, along with how quickly 
the field moves, we cannot possibly provide sufficient task 
descriptions that will span the range of interests and remain 
relevant long-term. Instead, we seek to lay the groundwork 
for those to be driven by the research community and sub-
communities. We therefore focus on two efforts: developing 
a framework for task protocols, setting, formatting and 
content guidelines to facilitate effective community-driven 
specification of standard tasks; and a preliminary set of 
example protocols that we believe are relevant for our 
respective communities and approaches, along with 
experimental implementation of those, including reporting 
the performance outcomes.  
In order to enable effective community-driven evolution 
of protocols and benchmarks, the web portal associated with 
this effort will serve as a jumping-off point. Protocols are 
hosted on arxiv.org, allowing them to be easily posted, 
shared, and cited, as well as easily updated as the 
community gives feedback and identifies shortcomings. Our 
portal will provide links to all protocols that meet the 
standards laid out in the template, and will provide a forum 
for discussion on individual protocols. 


 
     
 
 
Fig. 10: (left) Screen-capture from Openrave simulation and planning environment showing the HERB robot [34] planning a grasp of the 
power drill object in the set. (right) actual grasp being executed by the robot on the physical object.  
 
A. Protocol guidelines 
While developing protocols and benchmarks, one 
challenging aspect is to decide on the level of detail. 
Providing only high level descriptions of the experiment, in 
other words setting too few constraints, makes the 
repeatability of a benchmark questionable as well as its 
ability to assess the performance; variations caused by 
incomplete descriptions of test setups and execution 
processes induce discrepancy in measurements and won’t 
speak to some quantifiable performance. On the other hand, 
supplying too many constraints may limit a protocol’s 
applicability, and therefore narrows down its scope. For 
example, due to the variety of utilized hardware by different 
research groups in robotics field, satisfying constrained 
hardware descriptions is not usually possible or preferred.  
The aim of this section is to provide guidelines that help 
to maintain both reliable and widely applicable benchmarks 
for manipulation. For this purpose, five categories of 
information are introduced for defining manipulation 
protocols, namely (1) task description, (2) setup description, 
(3) robot/hardware/subject description, (4) procedure, and 
(5) execution constraints. These categories are explained 
below, and the protocol template provided in Appendix A: 
 
1) Task description: Task description is the highest level of 
information about the protocol. It describes the main 
action(s) of a task and (most of the time implicitly) the 
expected outcome(s). In this level, no constraints are given 
on the setup layout or how the task should be executed. 
Some task description examples are “pouring liquid from a 
pitcher to a glass,” “hammering a nail on a wood,” or 
“grasping an apple”. 
 
2) Setup Description: This category provides the list of 
target objects of the manipulation experiment, their 
descriptions and initial poses with respect to each other. 
Also, if there are any other objects used as obstacles or 
clutter in the manipulation scenario, their description and 
layout need to be described. For instance, if the task is 
pouring a liquid from a pitcher to a glass, the object 
properties of the pitcher and glass should be provided, and 
their initial poses should be defined. As discussed in the 
previous sections, the usage of non-standard objects 
introduces uncertainty to many manipulation experiments 
presented 
in 
literature. 
We 
believe 
that 
removing 
uncertainties in this category of information is crucial to 
maintain well-defined benchmarks. Providing the YCB 
object and model set is a step towards that purpose. Also, in 
the protocols proposed in this paper, the initial poses of the 
objects are accurately provided. 
Naturally, a task description can have various setup 
descriptions 
designed 
to 
assess 
the 
manipulation 
performance in different conditions. 
 
3) Robot/Hardware/Subject Description: This category 
provides information about the task executor. If the protocol 
is designed for a robotic system, the initial state of the robot 
with respect to the target object(s) and a priori information 
provided to the robot about the manipulation operation (e.g. 
the semantic information about the task, whether or not 
object shape models are provided etc.) are specified in this 
category. Also, if the protocol is designed for a specific 
hardware setup (including sensory suite), the description is 
given. If the task executor is a human subject, how the 
subject is positioned with respect to the manipulation setup 
is described here.  
 
4) Procedure: In this category, actions that are needed to be 
taken by the person who conducts the experiment are 
explained step by step. 
 
5) Execution Constraints: In this category, the constraints on 
how to execute the task are provided. For instance in Box 
and Blocks Test the subject is expected to use his/her 
dominant hand, and needs to transfer one block at a time, or 
if the task is “fetching a mug”, the robot may be required to 
grasp the mug from its handle.  
 In Appendix A, we provide a template for easily 
designing manipulation protocols using the abovementioned 
categories. The amount and specifics of the detail in a 
specific protocol will naturally vary based on the particular 
problem being examined, and therefore the insight of the 
authors about the intended application will be crucial in 
crafting an effective set of task descriptions and constraints. 


 
Related to this point, we anticipate protocols to be regularly 
improved and updated with feedback from the research 
community.  
B. Benchmark guidelines: 
After the task description, the second major part of each 
protocol is the specification of the associated benchmark 
specifying the details of the performance on the protocol. 
Benchmarks 
allow 
the 
researchers 
to 
specify 
the 
performance of their system or approach, and enable direct 
comparison with other approaches. The following categories 
of information are introduced for defining manipulation 
benchmarks.  
1) Adopted Protocol: A well-defined description can be 
obtained for a manipulation benchmark by adopting a 
protocol that is defined considering the abovementioned 
aspects. 
2) Scoring: Providing descriptive assessment measures is 
crucial for a benchmark. The output of the benchmark 
should give reasonable insight of the performance of a 
system. While designing the scoring criteria, it is usually a 
good practice to avoid binary (success/fail) measures; if 
possible, the scoring should include the intermediate steps of 
the task, giving partial points for a reasonable partial 
execution. 
3) To Submit: This field specifies what it is expected from 
the user of the benchmark. Ideally, the user gives detailed 
information about anything that is not specified by the 
protocol (if a robotic manipulation benchmark is considered, 
these could be robot type, gripper type, grasping strategy, 
motion planning algorithm, grasp synthesis algorithm, etc.). 
The user should also submit the resulting score of the test. 
Moreover, asking the user to submit the reasons of the failed 
attempts and the factors that bring success would be quite 
useful for people who analyze the results. 
V. YCB PROTOCOLS AND BENCHMARKS: 
While this protocol structure definition (and template 
provided in Appendix A) helps to guide the development of 
effective task specification for various manipulation 
benchmarks, we have developed a number of example 
protocols to both provide more concrete samples of the types 
of task definitions that can be put forward as well as specific 
and useful benchmarks for actually quantifying performance.   
We have defined five protocols to date: 
 
Pitcher-Mug Protocol, 
 
Gripper Assessment Protocol, 
 
Table Setting Protocol, 
 
Block Pick and Place Protocol, 
 
Peg Insertion Learning Assessment Protocol. 
From each protocol, a benchmark of reported performance is 
derived with the same name. We have implemented each of 
the protocols experimentally and report the benchmark 
performance of our implementations for each. These 
protocols and benchmarks can be found in Appendix B and 
the benchmarking results are presented in Appendix C. (Note 
that we intend to move the appendices to arxiv.org after peer 
review and not have them directly printed with the article.). 
We have also implemented the Box and Blocks Test for 
maintaining a baseline performance of this test for robotic 
manipulation. 
Short descriptions for the protocol and benchmarks and 
summary of the benchmarking results are provided below.   
  
1) Pitcher-Mug Protocol and Benchmark: 
One of the popular tasks among robotics researchers is 
pouring a liquid from a container. This task is interesting as 
it necessitates semantic interpretation, and smooth and 
precise manipulation of the target object. In Appendix B.1, a 
protocol is designed for executing this manipulation task. 
The protocol uses the pitcher and the mug of YCB object 
and model set, and provides a scenarios by specifying ten 
initial configurations of the pitcher and the mug. By 
standardizing the objects and providing detailed initial state 
information, it is aimed to maintain a common basis of 
comparison between different research groups. The 
benchmark derived from this protocol uses a scoring scheme 
that penalties the amount of liquid that remains in the pitcher 
or spilled on the table. This benchmark was applied using 
the HERB robot platform [60] which can be seen in Fig. 11. 
The reported results show that the task is successfully 
executed for 8 out of 10 pitcher mug configurations. For the 
two failed cases, the robot is able to grasp the pitcher, but 
cannot generate a suitable path for pouring the liquid. This 
shows the importance of planning the manipulation task as a 
whole rather than in segments. The details of the 
experimental results can be seen at Appendix C.1. 
 
2) YCB Gripper Assessment Protocol and Benchmark:  
The abilities of a robot’s gripper affect its manipulation 
performance significantly. In literature and in commercial 
market, various gripper designs are available each of which 
have different manipulation capabilities. The protocol 
presented in Appendix B.2 defines a test procedure for 
assessing the performance of grippers for grasping objects of 
various shapes and sizes. This protocol utilizes objects from 
the shape and tool categories of the YCB object and model 
set. Using this protocol, a benchmark is defined based on a 
scoring table. We applied this benchmark to two grippers 
designed in Yale GRAB Lab, the Model T and Model T42 
[62], which can be seen in Fig. 12. The results show that the 
Model T can provide successful grasp for only a limited 
range of object sizes. This gripper is not suitable for 
grasping small and flat object. However, the ability to 
interlace its fingers increases the contact surface with the 
 
 
Fig. 11: HERB robot implementing Pitcher-Mug Benchmark 


 
object and brings an advantage especially for grasping 
concave and articulated objects. The Model T42 is able to 
provide stable power grasps for large objects and precision 
grasps for small objects. This model is also successful in 
grasping flat objects thanks to its nail-like finger tips. 
However, not being able to interlace its fingers brings a 
disadvantage while grasping articulated objects. Using the 
same benchmark for evaluating different gripper designs did 
not only provide a basis of comparison, but also gave many 
clues about how to improve the designs. The details of the 
experimental results are presented in Appendix C.2. 
 
3) YCB Protocol and Benchmark for Table Setting:  
Pick-and-place is an essential ability for service robots. 
The benchmark provided in Appendix B.3 assesses this 
ability by the daily task of table setting. The protocol uses 
the mug, fork, knife, spoon, bowl and plate of the YCB 
object and model set. These objects are placed to predefined 
initial locations, and the robot is expected to replace them to 
specific final configurations. The benchmark scores the 
performance of the robot by the accuracy of the final object 
poses. This benchmark can also be applied in a simulation 
environment since the models of the objects are provided by 
the YCB Object and Model Set. A URDF file which spawns 
the scenario for Gazebo simulation environment is given at 
http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb/. A snapshot of this setting 
can be seen in Fig. 13. 
 
4) Block Pick and Place Protocol and Benchmark: 
Manual dexterity and the manipulation of small objects 
are critical skills for robots in several contexts.  The block 
pick and place protocol presented in Appendix B.4 is 
designed to test a robot’s ability to grasp small objects and 
transfer them to a specified location.  This task is an 
important test of both arm and gripper hardware and motion 
planning software, as both contribute to overall dexterity.  
Points are awarded based on completion and precision of the 
manipulation.  We executed this test on the HERB robot [60] 
as seen in Fig. 14.  An image of the printed layout with the 
placed blocks after task completion can be seen in Fig. 15. 
The results show that the robot is not able to success in 
precise pick and place task. The main reason is the utilized 
open loop grasping approach: The robot executes a robust 
push grasp strategy which allows it to grasp the blocks 
successfully. However, the pose of the block with respect to 
the gripper is not known precisely after the grasp. This 
prevents placing the blocks accurately to the target locations. 
The details of the experimental results are presented in 
Appendix C.3. 
 
 
Fig. 13: The simulation environment for Table Setting Benchmark.  
This environment can be spawned by using the URDF provided at 
http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb 
 
 
Fig. 14: HERB robot implementing Block Pick and Place 
Benchmark 
    
 
 
Fig. 15: The results of the Block Pick and Place Benchmark 
    
 
(a)                                        (b) 
 
Fig. 12: Grippers compared with Gripper Assessment Benchmark. 
(a) Model T, (b) Model T42. 


 
 
5) Peg Insertion Learning Assessment Protocol and 
Benchmark: 
The Peg Insertion Learning Assessment Benchmark is 
designed for allowing comparison between various learning 
techniques. The benchmark measures the performance of a 
learned peg insertion action under various positioning 
perturbations. The perturbations are applied by moving the 
peg board to a random direction for certain amount of 
distance. We applied this benchmark to assess the 
performance of a learned linear-Gaussian controller using a 
PR2 robot [63] (Fig. 16). The state of the controller consists 
of the joint angles and angular velocities of the robot, and 
the positions and velocities of three points in the space of the 
end effector (3 points in order to fully define a rigid body 
configuration). No information is available to the controller 
at run time except for this state information. The results 
show that, the learned controller shows reasonable 
performance, 4 success out of 10 trials, for the case of 5mm 
position perturbation to a random direction. This success rate 
can be achieved by executing the controller for only one 
second. However, the performance does not improve even if 
the controller is run for a longer period of time. In the case 
of 10mm position perturbation, the controller fails 
completely. We are planning to learn the same task with 
different 
learning 
techniques 
and 
compare 
their 
performances using the benchmark. 
 
6) Box and Blocks Test: 
As mentioned previously in Section 2, the Box and Blocks 
Test [41] is a widely used assessment technique that is 
utilized in prosthetics and rehabilitation fields. The test 
evaluates how many blocks can be grasped and moved from 
one side of the box (Fig. 17) to the other in a fixed amount 
of time. We believe that the application of this test can also 
be quite useful for assessing the manipulation capabilities of 
robots. In order to establish a baseline performance for this 
test for robotic manipulators, we applied the Box and Blocks 
Test with a PR2 robot (Fig. 17) by implementing a very 
simple heuristic rules: The robot picks a location from a 
uniform distribution over the box and attempts to pick up a 
block. The gripper's pose aligns with the length of the box. 
The gripper is then closed, and checked if it is fully closed. 
If the gripper closes fully, this means no blocks have been 
grasped and therefore the robot chooses a new location to 
attempt another pick. The robot repeats this heuristic until 
the gripper is not fully closed. When a grasp is detected, the 
robot moves to the destination box and releases the block. 
By using this heuristic, we run 10 experiments of 2 minutes 
each, and report the results in Appendix C.5. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
 This paper proposes a set of objects and related tasks, as 
well as high-resolution scans and models of those objects, 
intended to serve as a widely-distributed and widely-utilized 
set of standard objects to facilitate the implementation of 
standard performance benchmarks for robotic grasping and 
manipulation research. The objects were chosen based on an 
in-depth literature review of other objects and tasks 
previously proposed and utilized in robotics research, with 
additional consideration to efforts in prosthetics and 
rehabilitation. Furthermore, a number of practical constraints 
were considered, including a reasonable total size and mass 
of the set for portability, low cost, durability of the objects, 
and the likelihood that the objects would remain mostly 
unchanged in years to come. High-resolution RGBD scans 
of the objects were done and models of the objects have 
been constructed to allow easy portability into simulation 
and planning environments. All of these data are freely 
available in the associated repository [54]. The objects sets 
will be freely distributed to a large number of research 
groups through workshops/tutorials associated with this 
effort, and will be made available to purchase otherwise. 
While a common set of widely-available objects is a 
much-needed contribution to the manipulation research 
community, the objects themselves are just the beginning. 
The generation of appropriate detailed tasks and protocols 
involving the objects is ultimately what will allow for 
replicable research and performance comparison. We make 
inroads into that problem in this paper by proposing a 
structure for protocols and benchmarks, implemented in a 
template, as well as six example protocols. The specification 
of protocols and benchmarks will necessarily need to be sub-
community driven and continually evolving – specific 
aspects of the manipulation and specific research questions 
 
 
Fig. 17: PR2 executing the Box and Blocks Test. 
 
 
Fig. 16: PR2 executing the Peg Insertion Learning Assessment 
Benchmark. 


 
and interests will naturally require different task particulars 
(e.g. specified and free parameters). We therefore plan to 
involve the research community in this effort via a web 
portal and arXiv-style working documents for proposed 
protocols, and will work towards having the majority of 
those protocols come from the user community rather than 
the authors. Additionally, we plan to have on this portal a 
“records” keeping functionality to keep track of the current 
“world records” for the different tasks and protocols, along 
with video and detailed descriptions of the approaches 
utilized, generating excitement, buzz, motivation, and 
inspiration for the manipulation community to compare 
approaches and push forward the state of the art. 
Other efforts that we plan to undertake include more detail 
about the objects proposed, including information about the 
inertia of the objects, as well as frictional properties between 
the objects and common surfaced. Additionally, we will 
expand our treatment of the modelling of the objects, 
including addressing the tradeoffs between number of 
“triangles” and the reliable representation of the object 
geometry. Furthermore, before final publication and 
distribution of the object set, we will seek additional input 
from the research community on the specific objects in the 
set.  
It is our hope that this work will help to address the long-
standing need for common performance comparisons and 
benchmarks in the research community and will provide a 
starting point for further focused discussion and iterations on 
the topic. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 The authors would like to thank Michael Leddy for his 
efforts in measuring the physical properties of the objects in 
the set. We would also like to thank Peter Allen and Jeff 
Trinkle for their feedback on the objects in the set and the 
overall approach taken here. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Singh, J. Sha, K. S. Narayan, T. Achim, and P. Abbeel, "BigBIRD: 
A Large-Scale 3D Database of Object Instances," in International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2014. 
[2] 
B. Li, Y. Lu, C. Li, A. Godil, T. Schreck, M. Aono, et al. (2014). 
SHREC’14 Track: Large Scale Comprehensive 3D Shape Retrieval. 
Available: 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/vug/sharp/contest/2014/Generic3D/ 
[3] 
C. Goldfeder, M. Ciocarlie, H. Dang, and P. K. Allen, "The Columbia 
Grasp Database," in Robotics and Automation, 2009. ICRA '09. IEEE 
International Conference on, 2009, pp. 1710-1716. 
[4] 
(2014). Sketchup. Available: http://www.sketchup.com/ 
[5] 
S. Chitta, I. Sucan, and S. Cousins, "MoveIt!," IEEE Robotics 
Automation Magazine, vol. 19, pp. 18-19, March 2012. 
[6] 
Y. S. Choi, T. Deyle, T. Chen, J. D. Glass, and C. C. Kemp, "A list of 
household objects for robotic retrieval prioritized by people with 
ALS," in Rehabilitation Robotics, 2009. ICORR 2009. IEEE 
International Conference on, 2009, pp. 510-517. 
[7] 
http://amazonpickingchallenge.org/.  
[8] 
J. Adams, K. Hodges, J. Kujawa, and C. Metcalf, "Test-retest 
Reliability of the Southampton Hand Assessment Procedure," 
International Journal of Rehabilitation Research, vol. 32, p. S18, 
2009. 
[9] 
S. Kalsi-Ryan, A. Curt, M. Verrier, and F. MG, "Development of the 
Graded Redefined Assessment of Strength, Sensibility and Prehension 
(GRASSP): reviewing measurement specific to the upper limb in 
tetraplegia," Journal of Neurosurg Spine, vol. 1, pp. 65-76, 2012. 
[10] N. Yozbatiran, L. Der-Yeghiaian, and C. SC, "A standardized 
approach to performing the action research arm test," Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair, vol. 1, pp. 78-90, 2008. 
[11] E. D. Sears and K. C. Chung, "Validity and responsiveness of the 
Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function Test," J Hand Surg Am, vol. 35, pp. 30-
7, Jan 2010. 
[12] A. P. del Pobil, "Benchmarks in Robotics Research," ed, 2006. 
[13] R. Madhavan, R. Lakaemper, and T. Kalmar-Nagy, "Benchmarking 
and standardization of intelligent robotic systems," in Advanced 
Robotics, 2009. ICAR 2009. International Conference on, 2009, pp. 1-
7. 
[14] I. Iossifidis, G. Lawitzky, S. Knoop, and R. Zöllner, "Towards 
Benchmarking of Domestic Robotic Assistants," in Advances in 
Human-Robot Interaction. vol. 14, ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2005, pp. 403-414. 
[15] R. Detry, O. Kroemer, and D. Kragic, "International Workshop on 
Autonomous Grasping and Manipulation: An Open Challenge," ed, 
2014. 
[16] (2006). 
AIM@SHAPE 
Shape 
Repository 
v4.0. 
Available: 
http://shapes.aim-at-shape.net/viewmodels.php 
[17] A. Richtsfeld. (2012). The Object Segmentation Database (OSD). 
Available: http://www.acin.tuwien.ac.at/?id=289 
[18] P. Shilane, P. Min, M. Kazhdan, and T. Funkhouser, "The Princeton 
Shape Benchmark," in Shape Modeling Applications, 2004. 
Proceedings, 2004, pp. 167-178. 
[19] A. Kasper, Z. Xue, and R. Dillmann, "The KIT object models 
database: An object model database for object recognition, 
localization and manipulation in service robotics," The International 
Journal of Robotics Research, 2012. 
[20] S. Ulbrich, D. Kappler, T. Asfour, N. Vahrenkamp, A. Bierbaum, M. 
Przybylski, et al., "The OpenGRASP benchmarking suite: An 
environment for the comparative analysis of grasping and dexterous 
manipulation," in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2011 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, 2011, pp. 1761-1767. 
[21] G. Kootstra, M. Popovic, J. A. Jorgensen, D. Kragic, H. G. Petersen, 
and N. Kruger, "VisGraB: A benchmark for vision-based grasping," 
Paladyn, vol. 3, pp. 54-62, 2012. 
[22] G. Kragten, A. C. Kool, and J. Herder, "Ability to hold grasped 
objects by underactuated hands: Performance prediction and 
experiments," in Robotics and Automation, 2009. ICRA '09. IEEE 
International Conference on, 2009, pp. 2493-2498. 
[23] G. A. Kragten, C. Meijneke, and J. L. Herder, "A proposal for 
benchmark tests for underactuated or compliant hands," Mechanical 
Sciences, vol. 1, pp. 13-18, 2010. 
[24] B. Li, A. Godil, M. Aono, X. Bai, T. Furuya, L. Li, et al. (2012). 
SHREC’12 Track: Generic 3D Shape Retrieval. Available: 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/vug/sharp/contest/2012/Generic3D/ 
[25] A. Tatsuma, H. Koyanagi, and M. Aono, "A large-scale Shape 
Benchmark for 3D object retrieval: Toyohashi shape benchmark," in 
Signal Information Processing Association Annual Summit and 
Conference (APSIPA ASC), 2012 Asia-Pacific, 2012, pp. 1-10. 
[26] R. B. Rusu. (2011). NIST and Willow Garage: Solutions in Perception 
Challenge. 
Available: 
http://www.nist.gov/el/isd/challenge-
022511.cfm; http://www.willowgarage.com/blog/2011/02/28/nist-and-
willow-garage-solutions-perception-challenge 
[27] H. Dutagaci, A. Godil, P. Daras, A. Axenopoulos, G. Litos, S. 
Manolopoulou, et al. (2011). SHREC’11 Track: Generic Shape 
Retrieval. 
Available: 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/vug/sharp/contest/2011/NonRigid/ 
[28] A. Janoch, S. Karayev, Y. Jia, J. T. Barron, M. Fritz, K. Saenko, et al., 
"A category-level 3-D object dataset: Putting the Kinect to work," in 
Computer Vision Workshops (ICCV Workshops), 2011 IEEE 
International Conference on, 2011, pp. 1168-1174. 
[29] K. Lai, L. Bo, X. Ren, and D. Fox, "A large-scale hierarchical multi-
view RGB-D object dataset," in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 
2011 IEEE International Conference on, 2011, pp. 1817-1824. 
[30] Z. Lian, A. Godil, T. Fabry, T. Furuya, J. Hermans, R. Ohbuchi, et al. 
(2010). SHREC’10 Track: Non-rigid 3D Shape Retrieval. Available: 
http://tosca.cs.technion.ac.il/book/shrec_robustness2010.html 
[31] R. Wessel, m. Bl\"u, Ina, and R. Klein, "A 3D Shape Benchmark for 
Retrieval and Automatic Classification of Architectural Data," in 


 
Eurographics 2009 Workshop on 3D Object Retrieval, 2009, pp. 53-
56. 
[32] N. Iyer, S. Jayanti, and K. Ramani, "An Engineering Shape 
Benchmark for 3D Models," in Proceedings of IDETC/CIE 2005 
ASME 2005 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences 
\& Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, 2005. 
[33] R. Fang, A. Godil, X. Li, and A. Wagan, "A New Shape Benchmark 
for 3D Object Retrieval," in Proceedings of the 4th International 
Symposium on Advances in Visual Computing, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2008, pp. 381-392. 
[34] (2005). 
McGill 
3D 
Shape 
Benchmark. 
Available: 
http://www.cim.mcgill.ca/~shape/benchMark/ 
[35] N. Kapadia, V. Zivanovic, M. Verrier, and M. R. Popovic, "Toronto 
Rehabilitation Institute-Hand Function Test: Assessment of Gross 
Motor Function in Individuals With Spinal Cord Injury," in Topics in 
Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation, 2012. 
[36] R. W. Sumner and J. Popovic, "Deformation Transfer for Triangle 
Meshes," ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 3, 2014. 
[37] (2003). 
NTU 
3D 
Model 
Benchmark. 
Available: 
http://3d.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ 
[38] (2014). the ITI database. Available: http://vcl.iti.gr/3d-object-
retrieval/ 
[39] (2014). Model Bank Library. Available: http://digimation.com/3d-
libraries/model-bank-library/ 
[40] T. Wisspeintner, T. van der Zan, L. Iocchi, and S. Schiffer, 
"RoboCup@Home: Results in Benchmarking Domestic Service 
Robots," in RoboCup 2009: Robot Soccer World Cup XIII. vol. 5949, 
ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 390-401. 
[41] V. Mathiowetz, G. Volland, N. Kashman, and K. Wever, "Adult 
norms for the box and blocks test of manual dexterity," The American 
journal of occupational therapy, vol. 89, pp. 386-391, 1985. 
[42] V. Mathiowetz, K. Weber, N. Kashman, and G. Volland, "Adult 
norms for the Nine Hole Peg Test of finger dexterity," Occupational 
Therapy Journal of Research, vol. 5, pp. 24-38, 1985. 
[43] S. Rehab. http://saliarehab.com/.  
[44] GRASSP. Available: grassptest.com 
[45] Grasp 
and 
Release 
Test. 
Available: 
http://www.rehabmeasures.org/Lists/RehabMeasures/DispForm.aspx?
ID=1053 
[46] L. Resnik, L. Adams, M. Borgia, J. Delikat, R. Disla, C. Ebner, et al., 
"Development and Evaluation of the Activities Measure for Upper 
Limb Amputees," Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
vol. e4, pp. 488-494, 2013. 
[47] M. Popovic and C. Contway, "Rehabilitation Engineering Laboratory 
Hand Function Test For Functional Electrical Stimulation Assisted 
Grasping," ed, 2003. 
[48] H. Burger, F. Franchignoni, A. W. Heinemann, S. Kotnik, and A. 
Giordano, "Validation of the Orthotics and Prosthetics User Survey 
Upper Extremity Functional Status Module in People with Unilateral 
Upper Limb Amputation," Journal of Rehabilitation M, vol. 40, pp. 
393-399, 2008. 
[49] M. R. Popovic, T. Keller, I. P. I. Papas, V. Dietz, and M. Morari, 
"Surface-stimulation 
technology 
for 
grasping 
and 
walking 
neuroprostheses," IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Magazine, vol. 1, pp. 82-93, 2001. 
[50] J. Harris, J. Eng, W. Miller, and D. AS, "A self-administered Graded 
Repetitive Arm Supplementary Program (GRASP) improves arm 
function during inpatient stroke rehabilitation: a multi-site randomized 
controlled trial," Stroke, vol. 40, pp. 2123-2131, 2009. 
[51] K. A. Stubblefield, L. A. Milller, R. D. Lipschutz, M. E. Phillips, C. 
W. Heckathorne, and T. A. Kuiken, "Occupational Therapy Outcomes 
with Targeted Hyper-Reinnervation Nerve Transfer Surgery: Two 
Case Studies," in Proceedings of the MyoElectric Controls/Powered 
Prosthetics Symposium, 2005. 
[52] K. Matheus and A. M. Dollar, "Benchmarking grasping and 
manipulation: Properties of the Objects of Daily Living," in IROS, 
2010, pp. 5020-5027. 
[53] The Dash - "Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand". Available: 
http://dash.iwh.on.ca/system/files/dash_questionnaire_2010.pdf 
[54] http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb/.  
[55] M. Quigley, K. Conley, B. Gerkey, J. Faust, T. Foote, J. Leibs, et al., 
"ROS: an open-source Robot Operating System," ICRA workshop on 
open source software, vol. 3, p. 5, 2009. 
[56] R. Diankov and J. Kuffner, "OpenRAVE: A Planning Architecture for 
Autonomous Robotics," 2008. 
[57] N. Ratliff, M. Zucker, J. A. Bagnell, and S. Srinivasa, "CHOMP: 
Gradient Optimization Techniques for Efficient Motion Planning," 
Icra: 2009 Ieee International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation, Vols 1-7, pp. 4030-4035, 2009. 
[58] D. Berenson, S. S. Srinivasa, D. Ferguson, and J. J. Kuffner, 
"Manipulation planning on constraint manifolds," in Robotics and 
Automation, 2009. ICRA '09. IEEE International Conference on, 
2009, pp. 625-632. 
[59] M. Garland and P. S. Heckbert, "Surface simplification using quadric 
error metrics," presented at the Proceedings of the 24th annual 
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 1997. 
[60] S. S. Srinivasa, D. Berenson, M. Cakmak, A. Collet, M. R. Dogar, A. 
D. Dragan, et al., "Herb 2.0: Lessons Learned From Developing a 
Mobile Manipulator for the Home," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 
100, pp. 2410-2428, 2012. 
[61] I. A. Sucan, M. Moll, and L. E. Kavraki, "The Open Motion Planning 
Library," Ieee Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 19, pp. 72-82, 
Dec 2012. 
[62] R. M. Raymond, U. O. Lael, and A. M. Dollar, "A Modular, Open-
Source 3D Printed Underactuated Hands,," in IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Karlsruhe, Germany, 
2013. 
[63] W. Garage. (2009). Overview of the PR2 robot. Available: 
http://www.willowgarage.com/pages/pr2/overview 
 
 


 
 
APPENDIX A. PROTOCOL AND BENCHMARK TEMPLATE FOR MANIPULATION RESEARCH: 
 
MANIPULATION PROTOCOL TEMPLATE 
 
Reference No / Version 
 
Authors 
 
Institution 
 
Contact information 
 
Purpose                                  
Task Description            
 
Setup Description        
Description of the manipulation environment: 
List of objects and their descriptions: 
Initial poses of the objects: 
Robot/Hardware/Subject 
Description 
Targeted robots/hardware/subjects: 
Initial state of the robot/hardware/subject with respect to the setup: 
Prior information provided to the robot/hardware/subject: 
Procedure 
 
Execution Constraints 
 
 
 


 
Manipulation Benchmark Template 
  
Reference No / Version 
 
Authors  
 
Institution  
 
Contact information 
 
Adopted Protocol 
 
Scoring 
 
To Submit 
 
 
 
 


 
APPENDIX B. PROTOCOLS AND BENCHMARKS 
 
APPENDIX B.1 PITCHER-MUG PROTOCOL AND BENCHMARK: 
 
Pitcher-Mug Protocol 
 
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
P-PM-0.01 
Aaron Walsman, Berk Calli 
Institution                        
CMU, Yale University 
Contact information 
aaronwalsman@gmail.com, berk.calli@yale.edu 
Purpose                                 To assess the ability of a robot to execute a common daily task. 
Task Description            
Pour a liquid from the pitcher to the mug. 
Setup Description        
List of objects and their descriptions: 
The following objects from the YCB object set are used: The mug, the 
pitcher and the white table cloth. 
Initial poses of the objects: 
The initial poses of the mug and the pitcher are defined for ten different 
scenarios. Printable layouts provided are provided for all these 
configurations are in http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb/. Print the layouts to 
an A3 paper, and place them on the table one by one for each scenario. 
Description of the manipulation environment: 
Conduct the experiment on the white table cloth provided by the object 
set. Avoid background clutter. Instead of water, rice can be used to avoid 
hazardous conditions. 
Robot/Hardware 
Description 
Targeted robots: 
The protocol is designed for robots that have on board sensors. No 
sensors fixed to the environment should be used. 
Initial state of the robot/subject with respect to the setup: 
In the initial state, the robot’s vision sensor should be aligned with the 
corresponding marker on the printable layouts. 
Prior information provided to the robot: 
The robot does not know the model of the pitcher or the mug. 
The robot knows: 
 
both the pitcher and the mug have a handle,  
 
the pitcher’s handle is bigger than the mug’s handle, 
 
the opening of the pitcher is at the top and opposite side of the 
handle. 
Procedure 
1. Fill the mug with rice or water. 
2. Transfer the rice or water to the pitcher. 
3. Place the next A3 layout to the table. Place the pitcher and the mug 
on the corresponding places of the printable layout. 
4. Run the system. 
5. Empty the pitcher and the mug. 
6. Repeat steps 1 to 5 for all ten scenarios.  
Execution Constraints 
Same strategy should be used for each layout. 
 
 
 


 
 
Pitcher-Mug Benchmark 
  
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
B-PM-0.01 
Aaron Walsman, Berk Calli 
Institution                        
CMU, Yale University 
Contact information 
aaronwalsman@gmail.com, berk.calli@yale.edu 
Adopted Protocol 
Pitcher-Mug Protocol (Reference No: P-PM-0.01) 
Scoring            
 At least half of the mug should be filled. Otherwise, the system gets 0 
points. 
 It is aimed to pour the water without spilling it to the table. The 
following calculation gives 1 point for the perfectly executed task and 
applies penalties for the spilled water.  
o Measure the weight of the mug and the pitcher before the 
execution (Mbefore and Pbefore respectively). 
o Execute the task. 
o Measure the weight of the mug and pitcher after the execution 
(Mafter and Pafter respectively). 
o Calculate (Mafter-Mbefore)/ (Pbefore-Pafter). 
 Implement the protocols for all ten printable layouts and sum up the 
points for each execution for the overall score.  
To Submit 
 Scores for individual scenarios, and overall score. 
 Detailed description of the system. 
 Detailed comments on: 
o What makes the system successful? 
o What makes the system fail? 
 
 
 


 
APPENDIX B.2 GRIPPER ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL AND BENCHMARK: 
 
Gripper Assessment Protocol 
 
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
P-GA-0.01 
Berk Calli, Aaron Dollar 
Institution                        
Yale University 
Contact information 
berk.calli@yale.edu 
Purpose                                 Assessing the abilities of a gripper to firmly grasp objects of different 
sizes and shapes. 
Task Description          
Grasp objects with various sizes and shapes one by one. 
Setup Description        
List of objects and their descriptions: 
The following objects from the YCB object and model set are used:  
 Round objects: Soccer ball, softball, tennis ball, racquetball, golf ball, 
marbles (4 different sizes). 
 Flat objects: Washers (7 different sizes.), credit card. 
 Tools: Pen, scissors, screwdriver, driller, hammer, clamps (4 different 
sizes). 
 Articulated objects: Plastic chain, rope.  
Other objects: a 1 cm thick planar object (not included in the set, for 
applying position offset to the objects as explained below).  
The user of the protocol may prefer to use any combination of the above 
mentioned object categories depending on the scope of the performance 
assessment. 
 Description of the manipulation environment: 
Print the grid provided at http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb/ and place it on 
a table. This grid is used to easily apply position offsets to the object in 
Cartesian directions. 
Print another copy of the grid and stick it on the 1 cm thick planar object 
as explained at http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb/. Place the planar object on 
the table by aligning the grids.  
Initial poses of the objects: 
In order to assess the robustness of a gripper, position offsets will be 
applied to the objects while keeping the gripper position fixed. For this 
purpose, four set points (SP) are defined as follows: 
 SP 1: grid on the planar object, x = 0 cm, y = 0 cm,  
 SP 2: grid on the planar object, x = 1 cm, y = 0 cm, 
 SP 3: grid on the planar object, x = 0 cm, y = 1 cm, 
 SP 4: grid on the table, x = 0 cm, y = 0cm. 
For round objects: Four initial positions are defined by placing the objects 
at SP1, SP2, SP3 and SP4. (To stabilize the round objects, they can be 
placed on the washers). 
For flat objects: Three initial positions are defined for each object by 
aligning the center of the objects with SP1, SP2 and SP3. Set the 
orientation of the credit card such that the long edge is parallel to the x 
axis of the grid.  
For tools: Four initial positions are defined by aligning the (approximate) 
center of the objects with SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4. Set their orientation such 
that the major axis is parallel to the x axis of the grid. 
Articulated objects: Place the objects randomly inside the grid area. 


 
Robot/Hardware 
Description 
Targeted robots/hardware: 
Any. 
Initial state of the robot with respect to the setup: 
For each object in the round, flat, and tools categories, any desired 
grasping pose can be chosen when the object is at SP1. This position 
should be kept the same while conducting experiments with SP2, SP3 and 
SP4 (see the procedure part for details.) 
Prior information provided to the robot: 
None. 
Procedure 
For each object in the round, flat, and tools categories, 
1. Place the object to SP1. 
2. Set a desired grasping pose of the gripper, and record this pose. 
3. Execute the grasp. 
4. Lift the object. 
5. Hold for 3 seconds. 
6. Rotate the grasped object 90 degrees in the x direction of the grid. 
7. Hold for 3 seconds. 
8. Move the gripper to the pose recorded at step 2, and repeat the steps 3 
to 7 for set points SP2, SP3 and if applicable SP4. 
If the grasp fails at step 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7 when the object is at SP1, skip to 
the next object. If the grasp fails when the object is at SP2, SP3 or SP4, 
jump to step 8. 
For articulated objects: 
1. Place the object randomly inside the grid. 
2. Set a desired grasping pose of the gripper, and record this pose. 
3. Execute the grasp. 
4. Lift the object 15 cms. 
5. Hold for 3 seconds. 
6. Keeping the recorded pose of the gripper at step 2, repeat the  
experiment for 20 times. 
Execution Constraints 
Any grasping strategy can be utilized while grasping the objects. The 
grasping strategy can differ from object to object. However, the grasping 
strategy and the motion applied for SP1 should be kept the same for SP2, 
SP3 and SP4 for each object. It is not allowed to move the object to the 
edges of the planar object or the table. 
 
 
 


 
Gripper Assessment Benchmark 
  
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
Institution                        
B-GA-0.01 
Berk Calli, Aaron Dollar 
Yale University 
Contact information 
berk.calli@yale.edu 
Adopted Protocol                  Gripper Assessment Protocol (P-GA-0.01) 
Scoring            
Fill the attached table with the following rules: 
For each set points, and for each object category other than articulated 
objects: 
 After step 5 of the procedure, if the object is not dropped and if no 
visible motion of the object is detected within the gripper during steps 
4 and 5, the gripper gets 2 points. If the object is not dropped, but 
visible object motion is detected during steps 4 and 5, the gripper gets 
1 point. 
 If the object is still not dropped after step 7 and no visible motion of 
the object is detected within the grip during steps 6 and 7, add 2 more 
points. If the object is not dropped, but visible object motion is 
detected during steps 6 and 7 add 1 point. Write the score to the 
corresponding cell. 
For articulated objects: 
 If no part of the object is touching the table after step 5, the grasp is 
considered successful. Add 0.5 points for each successful grasp. 
To submit 
 Scoring table (attached to the benchmark) 
 Detailed descriptions of the gripper (or a reference that provide 
detailed descriptions). 
 Detailed comments on: 
o The advantages of the gripper. 
o The disadvantages of the gripper. 
o Reasons for the failed grasps. 
 
 
 


 
  
Scoring Table for Gripper Assessment 
Gripper name/model: 
  
Manufacturer: 
  
Name/Institution: 
  
  
  
  
Contact info: 
  
  
  
SP1 
SP2 (x offset) 
SP3 (y offset) 
SP4 (z offset) 
Round Objects 
Soccer Ball 
  
  
  
  
Softball 
  
  
  
  
Tennis ball 
  
  
  
  
Racquetball 
  
  
  
  
Golf ball 
  
  
  
  
Marble XL 
  
  
  
  
Marble L 
  
  
  
  
Marble M 
  
  
  
  
Marble S 
  
  
  
  
Flat Objects 
Washer 1 (largest) 
  
  
  
  
Washer 2 
  
  
  
  
Washer 3 
  
  
  
  
Washer 4 
  
  
  
  
Washer 5 
  
  
  
  
Washer 6 
  
  
  
  
Washer 7 (smallest) 
  
  
  
  
Credit card 
  
  
  
  
Tools 
Pen 
  
  
  
  
Scissors 
  
  
  
  
Hammer 
  
  
  
  
Screwdriver 
  
  
  
  
Driller 
  
  
  
  
Peg XL 
 
 
 
 
Peg L 
 
 
 
 
Peg M 
 
 
 
 
Peg S 
 
 
 
 
Articulated 
Chain 
 
 
 
 
Rope 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
APPENDIX B.3 YCB GRIPPER ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL AND BENCHMARK: 
 
Protocol for Table Setting 
 
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
Institutions                       
P-TS-0.01 
Berk Calli 
Yale University 
Contact information 
berk.calli@yal.edu 
Purpose                              To assess the pick and place ability of a robotic system. 
Task Description            
Set up a table by placing kitchen inventories to predefined places. 
Setup Description        
List of objects and their descriptions: 
The following objects from the YCB object set are used: The mug, the 
plate, the fork, the spoon, the knife, the bowl and the white table cloth. 
Initial poses of the objects 
The initial positions of each object are defined with a printable layout 
provided in http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb/. Print the layout to an A3 
paper, and place it on the table. 
Description of the manipulation environment: 
Conduct the experiment on the white table cloth provided by the object set. 
Avoid background clutter. The target positions of the objects are defined 
with a printable layout provided in http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb/. The 
final position of each object is designated with a different colored region. 
Print the layout to an A3 paper, and place it next to the first printable layout 
as explained on the website. 
Robot/Hardware 
Description 
Targeted robots/hardware: 
The protocol is designed for robots that have on board sensors. No 
sensors fixed to the environment should be used. 
Initial state of the robot with respect to the setup: 
The manipulator of the robot can start from any initial configuration that is 
at least 10 cm away from the target objects. 
Prior information provided to the robot: 
In order to avoid the use of object recognition algorithms and to evaluate 
only the manipulation performance, the object-color order is known to the 
robot: From left to right, the first object should be placed on the yellow 
region, the second object to the magenta region and the third object to the 
green region, forth object to the cyan region, fifth object to the blue region 
and sixed object to the red region. 
If a grasp synthesis algorithm for known objects is used, the models 
provided by the YCB model and object set can be utilized. If an algorithm 
for unknown objects is used, no a priori shape information should be 
provided to the robot. 
Procedure 
1. Place the objects to the initial positions indicated by the printable 
layout.  
2. Run the system. 
Execution Constraints 
None. 
 
 
 


 
Benchmark for Table Setting 
 
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
B-TS-0.01 
Berk Calli 
Institution                        
Yale University 
Contact information 
berk.calli@yale.edu 
Adopted Protocol                  Protocol for Table Setting (P-TS-0.01) 
Scoring            
 For each object that is placed fully inside the correct colored area, the 
system gets 4 points. 
 For each object that touches the correct color, but has some part outside 
the colored area, the system gets 2 points. 
 For each object that is grasped and lifted successfully, but placed totally 
outside the correct color area, the system gets 1 point. 
 Sum up the points for the overall score. 
To Submit 
 The resulting score. 
 System Description 
 Provide detailed comments on: 
o What makes the system successful? 
o What makes the system fail? 
o What kind of improvements are necessary in 
 the hardware design, 
 the grasp synthesis algorithm, 
 the manipulation strategy, 
 and semantic modeling of the task? 
 
 
 
 


 
APPENDIX B.4 BLOCK PICK AND PLACE PROTOCOL AND BENCHMARK: 
 
Block Pick and Place Protocol 
 
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
Institution                        
P-BP-0.01 
Aaron Walsman, Siddhartha Srinivasa 
CMU 
Contact information 
aaronwalsman@gmail.com 
Purpose                                 Assess the dexterity of a robotic manipulator using a pick-and-place task. 
Task Description            
Arrange blocks into a specified pattern. 
Setup Description        
Description of the manipulation environment: 
Print the template provided at http://rll.eecs.berkeley.edu/ycb/, and place 
it in front of the robot. The template signifies the target final positions of 
the blocks. 
List of objects and their descriptions: 
Eight wooden blocks that are provided by YCB object and models set (as 
a part of the Box and Blocks Test) are used. 
Initial poses of the objects: 
The blocks are placed on the table randomly but at least ten centimeters 
away from the printed template. 
Robot/Hardware/Subject 
Description 
Targeted robots/hardware/subjects: 
Any robotic manipulator. 
Initial state of the robot/hardware/subject with respect to the setup: 
The robot may start in any configuration such that the manipulator is at 
least ten centimeters from the blocks and template. 
Prior information provided to the robot/hardware/subject: 
The starting configuration of the template and blocks can either be  
specified a-priori, or perceived using on-board sensors. 
Procedure 
1) Place the blocks as described. 
2) Run the system. 
Execution Constraints 
None. 
 
Block Pick and Place Benchmark 
  
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
Institution                        
B-BP-0.01 
Aaron Walsman 
CMU 
Contact information 
aaronwalsman@gmail.com 
Adopted Protocol                  Block Pick and Place Protocol (P-BP-0.01) 
Scoring            
The robot is awarded one point for each block that is touching a unique 
target area on the printed template.  Two blocks touching the same target 
area does not score two points.  Additionally, if the robot is awarded one 
additional point for any block that is entirely contained within the target 
area (does not touch the border of the target area).  Finally, the robot loses 
one point for any block that is either partially or fully off of the printed 
template. 
To submit 
 
 Score. 
 Provide detailed comments on: 
o What makes the system successful? 
o What makes the system fail? 
o What kind of improvements are necessary? 


 
APPENDIX B.5 PEG INSERTION LEARNING ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL AND BENCHMARK: 
 
Peg Insertion Learning Assessment Protocol 
 
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
P-PI-0.01 
Arjun Singh, Pieter Abbeel 
Institution                        
UC Berkeley 
Contact information 
arjun810@gmail.com, pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu 
Purpose                                 To assess the learning performance of a robot by the task of inserting a 
single peg to a hole. 
Task Description            
Insert a peg to a hole with a learned policy. 
Setup Description        
Description of the manipulation environment: 
List of objects and their descriptions: 
9-peg hole test provided by YCB Object and model set is used.  
Initial poses of the objects: 
The robot gripper holds the peg in a pose specified by the user. The pose of 
the peg with respect to the gripper is kept the same for all executions.  
A home position for the peg board is defined by the user. 
20 perturbed initial positions are defined for the peg board as follows:  
 
Two perturbation levels are defined as 5mm perturbation and 10mm 
perturbation. 
 
The peg board is moved away from the home position following a 
random direction with the specified amount of perturbation. This 
process is repeated 10 times for each perturbation level, and the 
positions are recorded. 
Robot/Hardware/Subject 
Description 
Targeted robots/hardware/subjects: 
Any robotic manipulator that can translate the peg in x, y and z directions 
in the Cartesian space. 
Initial state of the robot/hardware/subject with respect to the setup: 
The initial pose of the manipulator is set in such a way that the initial 
position of the peg is 10 cm above the target hole. 
Prior information provided to the robot/hardware/subject: 
The home position of the peg board (thus the hole) is known by the robot. 
The perturbation amount and direction are unknown to the robot. 
Procedure 
Four execution durations are defined as 0.5 seconds, 1 second, 3 second 
and 5 second. 
The procedure is as follows: 
1) Place the peg board to the initial position. 
2) Move the robot to the initial position. 
3) Run the peg insertion procedure. 
4) Terminate the procedure after the execution duration. 
 
Execute this procedure 10 times for all four execution durations by 
setting the initial position of the peg board to the home position (40 
experiments). 
 
Execute this procedure once for each (recorded) perturbed initial 
positions for all four execution durations (80 experiments in total). 
Execution Constraints 
None. 
 
 
 


 
Peg Insertion Learning Assessment Benchmark 
  
Reference No / Version 
Authors                             
Institution                        
B-PI-0.01 
Arjun Singh, Pieter Abbeel 
UC Berkeley 
Contact information 
arjun810@gmail.com, pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu 
Adopted Protocol                      Peg Insertion Learning Assessment Protocol (P-PI-0.01) 
Scoring            
Fill the attached scoring table with the number of successful trials. 
To Submit 
 
Scoring table. 
 
System Description. 
 
Provide detailed comments on: 
o 
Utilized learning technique. 
o 
What makes the system successful? 
o 
What makes the system fail? 
o 
What kind of improvements are necessary? 
 
Scoring table for Peg Insertion Learning Assessment Benchmark 
 
 
Execution time 
 
0.5 sec 
1 sec 
3 secs 
5 secs 
No Perturbation 
     /10 
   /10 
   /10 
   /10 
5 mm Perturbation 
    /10 
   /10 
   /10 
   /10 
10 mm Perturbation 
    /10 
   /10 
   /10 
   /10 
 
 
 


 
APPENDIX C. BENCHMARKING RESULTS: 
APPENDIX C.1 PITCHER-MUG BENCHMARKING RESULTS 
Score 
Trial 
Pitcher Before 
Cup Before 
Pitcher After 
Cup After 
Score 
1 
.475 
.115 
.280 
.305 
0.974 
2 
.470 
.115 
.265 
.320 
1.0 
3 
.475 
.115 
.250 
.330 
0 
4 
.470 
.115 
.275 
.305 
0.974 
5 
.470 
.115 
.315 
.270 
0 
6 
.520 
.115 
.250 
.385 
1.0 
7 
.525 
.115 
.330 
.305 
0.974 
8 
.520 
.115 
.315 
.320 
1.0 
9 
.525 
.115 
.265 
.370 
.981 
10 
.520 
.115 
.275 
.355 
0.980 
Avg 
.497 
.115 
.282 
.3265 
0.7884 
System 
Description 
Robot platform: HERB (Siddhartha Srinivasa, Dmitry Berenson, Maya Cakmak, Alvaro Collet 
Romea, Mehmet Dogar, Anca Dragan, Ross Alan Knepper, Tim D. Niemueller, Kyle Strabala, J 
Michael Vandeweghe, and Julius Ziegler, “HERB 2.0: Lessons Learned from Developing a Mobile 
Manipulator for the Home,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 8, July, 2012, pp. 1-19) 
Gripper: Barrett BH280 (http://web.barrett.com/support/BarrettHand_Documentation/BH8-
280_Datasheet.pdf) 
Comments 
The table above shows the results of the Pitcher-Mug benchmark on the HERB robot platform using 
the CBiRRT planner with TSR constraints.  In this test, the locations of the pitcher and mug were 
known a priori.  Due to the robot’s large hands we were unable to make use of the pitcher’s handle 
and instead opted to pour by grasping the bottom of the pitcher cylinder itself.  For each test run the 
robot planned to an arm configuration offset slightly from the pitcher, then ran an open loop action 
to push the hand towards the pitcher and close the hand.  Once grasped, the robot lifted the pitcher 
and planned a pouring motion using the CBiRRT planner with TSR constraints to rotate the pitcher 
about a fixed point in front of the spout.  We did not have the ability to estimate the pitcher mass in 
the hand to determine pouring progress, so we instead waited a fixed number of seconds before 
returning the pitcher to an upright position and placing it back on the table.  On one run the robot 
was not able to replace the pitcher in an upright position.  In another, it did not manage to fill the 
cup halfway.  Both runs scored zero.  Because we used a randomized planner for most of the 
motions, the path taken between endpoints is nondeterministic.  This is one potential source of 
failure as occasionally the planner will find one path to an intermediate goal position, but then be 
unable to find a path to the next goal.  This is indeed what happened in failure case on trial 3 above.  
The planner found a trajectory to get into the pour position, but was then unable to find a trajectory 
to set the pitcher back down.  The other failure case in which the mug was not filled was caused by 
the pitcher not being tilted far enough when pouring the water.  This was also a problem with 
planning.  When setting up this experiment, we built in a backup mechanism whereby if the robot 
was unable to find a plan to tilt the pitcher all the way, it would attempt to plan to a different pose 
that was almost as far.  This increased reliability, but also led to this failure case in which the water 
was not poured out all the way.  The HERB robot performed well on this protocol in the non-failure 
cases.  The results show that the robot’s greatest room for improvement is in reliability rather than 
precision. 


 
APPENDIX C.2 GRIPPER BENCHMARKING RESULTS 
The YCB Gripper Benchmark is applied to two grippers designed in Yale GRAB lab: Gripper Model T, Gripper Model T42. 
The results are presented below. 
 
 
Scoring Table for Gripper Assessment 
Gripper name/model: 
Model T  
(Raymond R. Ma, Lael U. Odhner, Aaron M. Dollar "A Modular, Open-Source 
3D Printed Underactuated Hands," Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Karlsruhe, Germany, May 6-
10, 2013.) 
Manufacturer: 
Yale GRAB LAB  
Name/Institution: 
Yale GRAB LAB  
  
  
  
Contact info: 
 berk.calli@yale.edu 
  
  
SP1 
SP2 (x offset) 
SP3 (y offset) 
SP4 (z offset) 
Round Objects 
Soccer Ball 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Softball 
4 
3 
2 
2 
Tennis ball 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Racquetball 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Golf ball 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Marble XL 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Marble L 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Marble M 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Marble S 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Flat Objects 
Washer 1 (largest) 
0 
0 
0 
Washer 2 
0 
0 
0 
Washer 3 
0 
0 
0 
Washer 4 
0 
0 
0 
Washer 5 
0 
0 
0 
Washer 6 
0 
0 
0 
Washer 7 (smallest) 
0 
0 
0 
Credit card 
4 
4 
4 
Tools 
Pen 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Scissors 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Hammer 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Screwdriver 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Driller 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Peg XL 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Peg L 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Peg M 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Peg S 
2 
0 
0 
0 
Articulated 
Chain 
7 
 
 
 
Rope 
10 
 
 
 


 
Score  
Round objects  
43/187 
Flat objects 
12/96 
Tools 
50/144 
Articulated 
17/20 
Total 
122/447 
Comments 
Comments: The Model T gripper provided stable grasps for a limited range of object sizes.  It was 
unsuccessful for flat objects with round edges (washers), but maintained robust results for flat 
objects with straight edges. For most of the tool items, the gripper failed to provide a stable grasps. 
The reason of failure while grasping large objects appears to be due to the flexure joints at the 
finger bases: When the object gets bigger, these flexure joints apply torsional forces on the object 
which degrades the stability of the grasp. While grasping small objects, the ability of the gripper 
fingers to interlace works as a disadvantage: The objects smaller than the gaps between the fingers 
cannot be grasped with this gripper. The ability to interlace brings an advantage while grasping 
articulated objects: While grasping the chain and the rope, the gripper fingers can tightly wrap 
around the object and provide stable grasps. Interlacing appears to be an advantage while grasping 
objects like driller and hammer: The fingers can wrap around these objects and provide large 
amount of contact surfaces. However, the flexure joints at the finger bases are not able to provide 
enough stiffness to lift these heavy objects.  While grasping the clippers, it is observed that the 
gripper can take significant advantage of the concavities of the object. To summarize, even though 
the flexure joints at the finger bases provide adaptability, they are not able to supply the stiffness to 
grasp large and heavy objects. The performance of this gripper can be improved significantly, if 
these base flexure joints are replaced with pin joints.  
 
 


 
 
Scoring Table for Gripper Assessment 
Gripper name/model: 
 Model T42 
(Raymond R. Ma, Lael U. Odhner, Aaron M. Dollar "A Modular, Open-Source 
3D Printed Underactuated Hands," Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Karlsruhe, Germany, May 6-
10, 2013.) 
Manufacturer: 
Yale GRAB LAB  
Name/Institution: 
Yale GRAB LAB  
  
  
  
Contact info: 
 berk.calli@yale.edu 
  
  
SP1 
SP2 (x offset) 
SP3 (y offset) 
SP4 (z offset) 
Round Objects 
Soccer Ball 
3 
2 
3 
3 
Softball 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Tennis ball 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Racquetball 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Golf ball 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Marble XL 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Marble L 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Marble M 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Marble S 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Flat Objects 
Washer 1 (largest) 
4 
4 
4 
Washer 2 
4 
4 
4 
Washer 3 
4 
4 
4 
Washer 4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Washer 5 
4 
4 
4 
Washer 6 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Washer 7 (smallest) 
0 
0 
0 
Credit card 
4 
4 
4 
Tools 
Pen 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Scissors 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Hammer 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Screwdriver 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Driller 
3 
3 
3 
3 
Peg XL 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Peg L 
4 
3 
3 
4 
Peg M 
4 
4 
4 
3 
Peg S 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Articulated 
Chain 
2 
 
 
 
 
Rope 
10 
 
 
 


 
Score 
Round objects 
182/187 
Flat objects 
84/96 
Tools 
91/114 
Articulated 
12/20 
Total 
379/447 
Comments 
The Model T42 gripper provided stable grasps for a large range of object sizes and shapes. It is 
observed that it can provide power grasps by adapting to large shapes, and can provide precision 
grasps while grasping small objects thanks to its finger design. By utilizing its nails, the gripper 
was able to grasp very tiny and flat objects (i.e. small washers and credit card) robustly. The 
main disadvantage appears to be the non-interlacing fingers. For objects like hammer and driller, 
the non-interlacing fingers prevent to acquire firm grasps due to insufficient contact surfaces. The 
same disadvantage also applies while grasping articulated objects. It is also observed that 
concavities on the object surface sometimes leads to insufficient contact which prevents a firm 
grasp. This has been observed while grasping the clippers. 
 
 


 
 
 
APPENDIX C.3 BLOCK PICK AND PLACE BENCHMARKING RESULTS: 
 
Trial 
Blocks Touching 
Target Areas 
Blocks Entirely Within 
Target Areas 
Blocks Partially Off 
Printed Template 
Score 
1 
7 
0 
1 
6 
2 
7 
1 
1 
7 
3 
6 
0 
1 
5 
4 
0 
0 
8 
-8 
5 
1 
0 
7 
-6 
6 
7 
0 
0 
7 
Avg 
4.67 
0.17 
3.0 
1.83 
System 
Description 
Robot platform: HERB (Siddhartha Srinivasa, Dmitry Berenson, Maya Cakmak, Alvaro Collet 
Romea, Mehmet Dogar, Anca Dragan, Ross Alan Knepper, Tim D. Niemueller, Kyle Strabala, J 
Michael Vandeweghe, and Julius Ziegler, “HERB 2.0: Lessons Learned from Developing a Mobile 
Manipulator for the Home,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 8, July, 2012, pp. 1-19) 
Gripper: Barrett BH280 (http://web.barrett.com/support/BarrettHand_Documentation/BH8-
280_Datasheet.pdf) 
Comments 
The table above shows six test runs of the block placement protocol on the HERB robot platform 
using the CBiRRT planner with TSR constraints. Because of the relatively large hands of the 
HERB robot and the small size of the blocks, we developed a block grasping strategy that consisted 
of using CBiRRT to plan the end effector to a position above and slightly behind a selected block.  
The system then runs a series of open-loop actions that lower the hand to the table height and push 
the end-effector forward while the hand is in a position designed to funnel the block into a 
graspable position.  The hand then closes, grasping the block and the end-effector pulls away from 
the table again.  In order to place the block, CBiRRT plans the end-effector to a position above the 
desired final location of the block, then another open-loop action lowers the hand to the table and 
gently sets the block down to avoid unnecessary bouncing.  We found this strategy was largely 
successful at placing the blocks such that they at least touched the target locations, however due to 
uncertainties introduced by the open-loop motions, we were not able to reliably place the blocks 
such that they were entirely within the target squares.  In these results, trial 4 and 5 encountered 
irrecoverable conditions early into the run, which dropped the overall average substantially.  If 
greater reliability could be achieved, an average score above 6.0 would be reasonable.  Note that 
this is well below the 16.0 perfect score that would awarded if all blocks we placed entirely within 
their respective target areas.  In order to achieve this score, more development would be required to 
achieve a grasp and place action that resulted in less uncertainty and more repeatability.  For these 
tests, the failure cases were caused by planning failures with our randomized planner in which no 
paths were found either to pick the block up or to place it.  This is partially because we specified 
relatively small goal regions for these actions, but also because some of the target regions were 
close to the edge of the robot’s reachable workspace.  The results provide a reasonable assessment 
of the robot’s precision and repeatability when performing this task, and revealed a clear path 
towards improvement. 
 
 
 


 
 APPENDIX C.4 PEG INSERTION LEARNING BENCHMARKING RESULTS: 
 
 
Execution time 
 
0.5 sec 
1 sec 
3 secs 
5 secs 
No Perturbation 
7/10 
9/10 
10/10 
10/10 
5 mm Perturbation 
2/10 
4/10 
4/10 
4/10 
10 mm Perturbation 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
 
System Description 
PR2 (https://www.willowgarage.com/pages/pr2/overview) 
Comments 
Utilized learning technique: In order to achieve the manipulation task, a linear-Gaussian 
controller is learned. The state consists of the joint angles and angular velocities of the 
robot, and the positions and velocities of three points in the space of the end effector (3 
points in order to fully define a rigid body configuration).The objective during training 
depends on the distance between these points and the target position (measured before the 
random, unknown perturbations are added, which help to train a more robust controller). 
No information is available to the controller at test time except joint angles, angular 
velocities, and the positions & velocities of those three points. A random perturbation in 
the horizontal plane is sampled from a normal distribution with standard deviation of 3 mm 
for each trial. 
 
APPENDIX C.5 BOX AND BLOCKS TEST RESULTS: 
Utilized approach: The robot picks a location from a uniform distribution over the box and attempts to pick up a block. The 
gripper's pose aligns with the length of the box.  The gripper is then closed, and checked if it is fully closed. If the gripper 
closes fully, this means no blocks have been grasped and therefore the robot chooses a new location to attempt another pick. 
The robot repeats this heuristic until the gripper is not fully closed. When a grasp is detected, the robot moves to the 
destination box and releases the box. By using this heuristic, we run 10 experiments of 2 minutes each, and the results are 
presented in the table below. 
 
System 
Description 
PR2 (https://www.willowgarage.com/pages/pr2/overview) 
Trial 
Miss** 
Pick 1* 
Pick 2* 
Pick 3* 
Pick 4* 
Successful 
Transfers 
Blocks 
Transfered 
Transfer 
fail*** 
1 
6 
4 
4 
0 
0 
8 
12 
0 
2 
4 
3 
6 
0 
0 
9 
15 
1 
3 
5 
6 
2 
0 
0 
8 
10 
1 
4 
7 
3 
2 
0 
1 
6 
11 
1 
5 
7 
5 
2 
0 
0 
7 
9 
1 
6 
6 
7 
1 
0 
0 
8 
9 
0 
7 
7 
4 
3 
0 
0 
7 
10 
1 
8 
4 
9 
0 
0 
0 
9 
9 
0 
9 
12 
0 
4 
0 
0 
4 
8 
1 
10 
7 
0 
6 
1 
0 
7 
15 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mean 
6.5 
4.1 
3 
0.1 
0.1 
7.3 
10.8 
0.7 
Standard 
devation 
2.15 
2.7 
1.89 
0.3 
0.3 
1.41 
2.35 
0.45 
*Pick x: the number of times the robot successfully picked and dropped off x blocks. 
**Miss: the number of times the gripper closed and there was no block in it. 
***Transfer fail: the number of times the robot fails to pick up a block and performs a drop off anyways.