The Impact of AI on Developer Productivity:
Evidence from GitHub Copilot
Sida Peng,1∗Eirini Kalliamvakou,2 Peter Cihon,2 Mert Demirer3
1Microsoft Research, 14820 NE 36th St, Redmond, USA
2GitHub Inc., 88 Colin P Kelly Jr St, San Francisco, USA
3MIT Sloan School of Management, 100 Main Street Cambridge, USA
∗To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: sidpeng@microsoft.com.
Abstract
Generative AI tools hold promise to increase human productivity. This paper presents re-
sults from a controlled experiment with GitHub Copilot, an AI pair programmer. Recruited
software developers were asked to implement an HTTP server in JavaScript as quickly as
possible. The treatment group, with access to the AI pair programmer, completed the task
55.8% faster than the control group. Observed heterogenous effects show promise for AI
pair programmers to help people transition into software development careers.
Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) applications hold promise to increase human productivity. A va-
riety of AI models have demonstrated human-level capabilities in ﬁelds ranging from natural
language understanding to image recognition [Zhang et al., 2022]. As these systems are de-
ployed in the real-world, how do they change labor productivity? While there is a growing
literature studying perceptions of AI tools, how people use them, and their implications for
security and education [Nguyen and Nadi, 2022, Barke et al., 2022, Finnie-Ansley et al., 2022,
Sandoval et al., 2022] there has been little research on productivity impacts of AI-powered tools
1
arXiv:2302.06590v1  [cs.SE]  13 Feb 2023


in professional contexts, cf. [Mozannar et al., 2022, Vaithilingam et al., 2022, Ziegler et al., 2022].
The potential productivity impacts of AI have major implications for the labor market and
ﬁrms, including changes in employment, skills, and ﬁrm organization [Raj and Seamans, 2018,
Agrawal et al., 2019].
This paper studies the productivity effects of AI tools on software development. We present
a controlled trial of GitHub Copilot, an AI pair programmer that suggests code and entire func-
tions in real time based on context. GitHub Copilot is powered by OpenAI’s generative AI
model, Codex [Chen et al., 2021]. In the trial, programmers were tasked and incentivized to
implement an HTTP server in JavaScript as quickly as possible. The treated group had access
to GitHub Copilot and watched a brief video explaining how to use the tool. The control group
did not have access to GitHub Copilot but was otherwise unconstrained, i.e., they were free to
use internet search and Stack Overﬂow to complete the task.
The performance difference between treated and control groups are statistically and practi-
cally signiﬁcant: the treated group completed the task 55.8% faster (95% conﬁdence interval:
21-89%). Developers with less programming experience, older programmers, and those who
program more hours per day beneﬁted the most. These heterogeneous effects point towards
promise for AI-pair programmers in support of expanding access to careers in software devel-
opment.
The paper proceeds as follows. We ﬁrst describe the design of the controlled trial and
provide summary statistics. We then present the results. We conclude by a discussion on im-
plications of the study for productivity research on AI-powered tools, its limitations, and future
research directions on the broader economic impacts of AI-driven productivity.
2


Study Design
We conducted a controlled experiment to measure the productivity impact of using GitHub
Copilot in programming tasks. The experiment began on May 15, 2022 and ended on June 20,
2022, right before GitHub Copilot became generally available. We recruited 95 professional
programmers through Upwork, a freelancing platform. Participation in the experiment was
advertised on Upwork as a job posting, looking to recruit freelancer developers. Figures 1 and
2 show (respectively) the job posting and the contract that was sent to participants to sign, in
accordance with Upwork’s policies. Once participants signed the contract, they were randomly
split into control and treatment groups.
Figure 3 shows the instructions sent to each group through email. The treated group was
instructed to watch a 1-minute video introducing them to GitHub Copilot. In addition to the
instructions, they also received an automated email with installation instructions for GitHub
Copilot once granted access to the tool. We verify from telemetry after the experiment that all
participants from the treated group have conﬁgured GitHub Copilot and accepted recommenda-
tions other than ﬁve who did not ﬁnish the sign up and thus started the experiment without the
GitHub Copilot. Both treated and control groups were instructed to complete an entry survey to
provide demographic information such as age, gender, location, and educational background.
Before we began recruitment, we received approval for the study from the Microsoft Research
Ethics Review Board.
Participants were instructed to write an HTTP server in JavaScript—the treatment group
would use GitHub Copilot to complete the task, while the control group would not. Besides the
use of GitHub Copilot in the treated group, participants were unconstrained in their software
development —they could use any sources of information as they normally do, such as internet
search and Stack Overﬂow.
3


We calculated two metrics as a measure of performance for each group: task success and
task completion time. Task success was measured as the percentage of participants in a group
that adequately completed the task. Task completion time was measured as the time from start
to end of the task. Using a standardized task provides us with precise measures of performance
as it is difﬁcult to measure productivity of software developers.
To administer the task, we used GitHub Classroom, a platform for teachers to issue and
grade coding assignments. In this way, we accurately measured the timing and completion for
each participant. The instructions gave participants a link to a particular GitHub Classroom
instance with a single assignment referencing a template repository. When joining the assign-
ment, participants received a personal copy of the template repository, with the task description
(shown in Figure 4) and a skeleton codebase for participants to build upon. The creation date
and time of that personal copy created a timestamp. Each participant’s repository was private
to them and visible to the researchers conducting the experiment—but not to other participants.
We included a test suite in the repository, comprising twelve checks for submission correct-
ness. If a submission passes, all twelve tests we counted are successfully completed. Partici-
pants could see the tests but were unable to alter them.
When participants committed and pushed their changes to GitHub, GitHub Classroom ran
the test suite on their submission and reported the number of passing tests. Participants could
push as often as they pleased, automatically logging a timestamp each time. The time elapsed
between the timestamp of repository creation and the timestamp of the ﬁrst commit to success-
fully pass all 12 tests was counted as the participant’s task completion time.
The full history of test suite runs is visible on each repository, enabling researchers to ob-
serve partial results for participants that did not fully complete the task. The participants’ ﬁnal
compensation is calculated based on their time to completion and the scale we had previously
shared with them (shown in Figure 1).
4


After participants had completed the task, we sent them the link to an exit survey. We asked
the treatment group how helpful they found GitHub Copilot as they worked on the task, as well
as asked them to estimate how much faster they completed the task compared to how long this
task would have taken them without using GitHub Copilot. We also asked the control group to
estimate the size of the speed gain they would have experienced if they used GitHub Copilot,
after showing them a 1-minute demo video.
Results
A total of 166 offers were sent during the experiment, and 95 were accepted. The 95 developers
were randomly assigned into control and treated groups, with 45 in the treated group and 50 in
control. Thirty-ﬁve developers from both the treated and control groups completed the task and
survey. Figure 5 presents the summary statistics of these participants.
Most of the participants are in the age group of 25-34 and come from India and Pakistan.
This group of participants is also characterized by relatively lower income (median yearly in-
come between $10,000-$19,000) compared to US standards but high education level (the ma-
jority have a 4-year degree and above). The group has an average coding experience of 6 years
and, on average, reported spending 9 hours on coding in a working day.
Figure 6 plots the distribution between time to completion between treated and control
groups. Conditioning on completing the task, the average completion time from the treated
group is 71.17 minutes and 160.89 minutes for the control group. This represents a 55.8% re-
duction in completion time. The p-value for the t-test is 0.0017, and a 95% conﬁdence interval
for the improvement is between [21%, 89%]. There are four outliers with time to completion
above 300 min. All outliers are in the control group, however our results remain robust if these
outliers are dropped. This result suggests that Copilot increases average productivity signif-
icantly in our experiment population. We also ﬁnd that the treated group’s success rate is 7
5


Table 1: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
Estimates
SE
t-Stat
p-Value
(Intercept)
78.01
67.84
1.15
0.2552
Programming experience (years)
8.23
4.36
1.90
0.0629
Hours of programming per day
-11.70
4.74
-2.47
0.0168
Age: 25-44
-74.55
33.52
-2.22
0.0303
Unemployed
-35.98
36.33
-0.99
0.3263
Income less than $20,000
0.64
27.47
0.02
0.9814
No college
-36.57
32.89
-1.11
0.2711
Language Preference: Java
-11.77
33.16
-0.35
0.7240
Language Preference: Python
22.90
42.19
0.54
0.5895
Note: This table presents the heterogeneous treatment effects. The results suggest developer with less program-
ming experience are more likely to beneﬁt from Copilot, similarly for developers with more daily programming
hours and in the age group above 25.
percentage points higher than the control group, but the estimate is not statistically signiﬁcant,
with a 95% conﬁdence interval of [-0.11, 0.25].
We then investigate whether this effect is heterogeneous across different dimensions includ-
ing experience, employment status, income, education and software language preference. We
assume the treatment effect is a linear function of the covariates of interest. We apply Horvitz-
Thomson transformation in [Athey and Imbens, 2015] (see also [Banerjee and Duﬂo, 2003] and
[Carneiro et al., 2011])) and then regress the transformed outcome of interest on observables.
The estimates in Table 1 report coefﬁcients from this regression. The results show that less ex-
perienced developers (years of professional coding), developers with heavy coding load (hours
of coding per day), and older developers (developers aged between 25 and 44) beneﬁt more
from Copilot.
We conducted an exit survey with two questions to learn about the experience of subjects.
First, we asked them to estimate how much productivity gain or loss (in percentage term) Copi-
lot provided to them for completing the task. While the control group was not exposed to Copi-
6


lot during the task, they were given the tutorial video before answering this question so that
they are aware of the features of Copilot. Figure 7 presents the distribution of the self-reported
productivity gain estimates from the control and treated groups. On average, participants in
both treated and control groups estimated a 35% increase in productivity, which is an underes-
timation compared with the 55.8% increase in their revealed productivity.
In the second question, participants were asked the highest monthly price at which they
would be interested in getting notiﬁed about the release of GitHub Copilot. The intention is to
learn about developers’ willingness to pay for Copilot as the answer to this question provides
an upper bound for the developers’ willingness to pay. Figure 8 presents the distribution of the
irrelevant price separated for the control and treated groups. The average irrelevant price for the
treated group is $27.25, and the average irrelevant price for the control group is $16.91, both per
month. The difference is statistically signiﬁcant at the 95% level. This result provides indirect
evidence that treated group beneﬁted from Copilot during their task as their willingness to pay
is signiﬁcantly higher than the control group.
Discussion
This paper presents evidence on the productivity effects of generative AI tools in software de-
velopment. To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst controlled experiment to measure the
productivity of AI tools in professional software development. Our results suggest that Copilot
has statistically and practically signiﬁcant impact on productivity: the treated group that has
access to GitHub Copilot was able to complete the task 55.8% faster than the control group.
Further investigations into the productivity impacts of AI-powered tools in software devel-
opment are warranted. This study examines a standardized programming task in an experiment
to obtain a precise measure of productivity, instead of a task where developers collaborate on
large projects in professional proprietary and/or open-source settings. Productivity beneﬁts may
7


vary across speciﬁc tasks and programming languages, so more research is needed to understand
how our results generalizes to other tasks. Finally, this study does not examine the effects of
AI on code quality. AI assistance can increase code quality if it suggests code better than the
programmer writes, or it can reduce quality if the programmer pays less attention to code. The
code quality can have performance and security considerations that can change the real-world
impact of AI.
The heterogeneous effects identiﬁed in this study warrant close attention. Our results sug-
gest that less experienced programmers beneﬁt more from Copilot. If this result persists in
further studies, the productivity beneﬁts for novice programmers and programmers of older
age point to important possibilities for skill initiatives that support job transitions into software
development.
The economic impacts of these models also warrant further research [Manning et al., 2022],
with particular attention on their implications for labor market. In 2021, over 4.6 million people
in the United States worked in computer and mathematical occupations,1 a Bureau of Labor
Statistics category that includes computer programmers, data scientists, and statisticians. These
workers earned $464.8 billion or roughly 2% of US GDP. If the results of this study were to be
extrapolated to the population level, a 55.8% increase in productivity would imply a signiﬁcant
amount of cost savings in the economy and have a notable impact on GDP growth. It is, as of
yet, unclear how such gains would be distributed and how job tasks would change to incorporate
AI-powered developer tools. It is important to consider such impacts and to begin research on
these implications at the outset [Klinova and Korinek, 2021].
1https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes150000.htm
8


References
[Agrawal et al., 2019] Agrawal, A., Gans, J. S., and Goldfarb, A. (2019). Artiﬁcial intelli-
gence: the ambiguous labor market impact of automating prediction. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 33(2):31–50.
[Athey and Imbens, 2015] Athey, S. and Imbens, G. W. (2015). Machine learning methods for
estimating heterogeneous causal effects. stat, 1050(5):1–26.
[Banerjee and Duﬂo, 2003] Banerjee, A. V. and Duﬂo, E. (2003). Inequality and growth: What
can the data say? Journal of Economic Growth, 8:267–299.
[Barke et al., 2022] Barke, S., James, M. B., and Polikarpova, N. (2022). Grounded copilot:
How programmers interact with code-generating models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.15000.
[Carneiro et al., 2011] Carneiro, P., Heckman, J. J., and Vytlacil, E. J. (2011).
Estimating
marginal returns to education. American Economic Review, 101(6):2754–81.
[Chen et al., 2021] Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Pinto, H. P. d. O., Kaplan, J.,
Edwards, H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G., et al. (2021). Evaluating large language
models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374.
[Finnie-Ansley et al., 2022] Finnie-Ansley, J., Denny, P., Becker, B. A., Luxton-Reilly, A., and
Prather, J. (2022). The robots are coming: Exploring the implications of openai codex on
introductory programming. In Australasian Computing Education Conference, pages 10–19.
[Klinova and Korinek, 2021] Klinova, K. and Korinek, A. (2021). Ai and shared prosperity. In
Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pages 645–651.
[Manning et al., 2022] Manning, S., Mishkin, P., Hadﬁeld, G., Eloundou, T., and Eisner, E.
(2022). A research agenda for assessing the economic impacts of code generation models.
9


[Mozannar et al., 2022] Mozannar, H., Bansal, G., Fourney, A., and Horvitz, E. (2022). Read-
ing between the lines: Modeling user behavior and costs in ai-assisted programming. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.14306.
[Nguyen and Nadi, 2022] Nguyen, N. and Nadi, S. (2022). An empirical evaluation of github
copilot’s code suggestions. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Mining
Software Repositories, pages 1–5.
[Raj and Seamans, 2018] Raj, M. and Seamans, R. (2018). Artiﬁcial intelligence, labor, pro-
ductivity, and the need for ﬁrm-level data. In The economics of artiﬁcial intelligence: An
agenda, pages 553–565. University of Chicago Press.
[Sandoval et al., 2022] Sandoval, G., Pearce, H., Nys, T., Karri, R., Dolan-Gavitt, B., and Garg,
S. (2022). Security implications of large language model code assistants: A user study. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2208.09727.
[Vaithilingam et al., 2022] Vaithilingam, P., Zhang, T., and Glassman, E. L. (2022). Expec-
tation vs. experience: Evaluating the usability of code generation tools powered by large
language models.
[Zhang et al., 2022] Zhang, D., Maslej, N., Brynjolfsson, E., Etchemendy, J., Lyons, T.,
Manyika, J., Ngo, H., Niebles, J. C., Sellitto, M., Sakhaee, E., et al. (2022). The ai index
2022 annual report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.03468.
[Ziegler et al., 2022] Ziegler, A., Kalliamvakou, E., Li, X. A., Rice, A., Rifkin, D., Simister,
S., Sittampalam, G., and Aftandilian, E. (2022). Productivity assessment of neural code
completion. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Machine
Programming, pages 21–29.
10


Figure 1: Upwork job posting
Note: Job posting on Upwork starting May 25th 2022. The posting includes the task description, skill requirements
and budget information.
11


Figure 2: Upwork contract
Note: The contract sent to participants through Upwork. Upon accepting the contract, participants were random-
ized into control and treatment groups and given instructions for the task.
12


Figure 3: Instruction email to participants
Note: Email instructions sent to participants in the treatment (top) and control (bottom) groups.
13


Figure 4: Participants’ view of the task description
Note: The task description participants saw in the index.js ﬁle in the repository that was automatically created for
them by GitHub Classroom.
14


15


Figure 5: Summary statistics of the experiment participants
From left to right on each row see the following distributions: Participant age; Number of different languages used
in the last 2 years; Level of education; Employment status; Geographical location; Yearly income; Programming
experience; Time spent coding daily.
16


Figure 6: Time to task completion
Note: Distribution of time to task completion between treated (blue) and control (orange) groups
17


Figure 7: Self-estimated productivity gain
Note: This graph shows the distribution of the estimated productivity improvement when using Copilot. Blue
represents the estimation from the treated group and orange represents the estimation from the control group.
18


Figure 8: Distributing of irrelevant price
Note: This graph shows the distribution of the irrelevant price between the treated (blue) and control (orange)
groups.
19