arXiv:2310.02003v6  [cs.SE]  27 Jun 2025
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
L2MAC: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL AUTOMATIC
COMPUTER FOR EXTENSIVE CODE GENERATION
Samuel Holt
University of Cambridge
sih31@cam.ac.uk
Max Ruiz Luyten
University of Cambridge
mr971@cam.ac.uk
Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) are constrained by the fixed
context window of the underlying transformer architecture, hindering their ability
to produce long and coherent outputs. Memory-augmented LLMs are a promising
solution, but current approaches cannot handle long output generation tasks since
they (1) only focus on reading memory and reduce its evolution to the concate-
nation of new memories or (2) use very specialized memories that cannot adapt
to other domains. This paper presents L2MAC1, the first practical LLM-based
general-purpose stored-program automatic computer (von Neumann architecture)
framework, an LLM-based multi-agent system, for long and consistent output
generation. Its memory has two components: the instruction registry, which is pop-
ulated with a prompt program to solve the user-given task, and a file store, which
will contain the final and intermediate outputs. Each instruction in turn is executed
by a separate LLM agent, whose context is managed by a control unit capable
of precise memory reading and writing to ensure effective interaction with the
entire file store. These components enable L2MAC to generate extensive outputs,
bypassing the constraints of the finite context window while producing outputs
that fulfill a complex user-specified task. We empirically demonstrate that L2MAC
achieves state-of-the-art performance in generating large codebases for system
design tasks, significantly outperforming other coding methods in implementing
the detailed user-specified task; we show that L2MAC works for general-purpose
extensive text-based tasks, such as writing an entire book; and we provide valuable
insights into L2MAC’s performance improvement over existing methods.
1
INTRODUCTION
Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), Instruct
GPT (Ouyang et al., 2022), and the most recent GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), have achieved unprecedented
success in generating high-quality user-directed text. Despite their impressive capabilities, these
models are inherently restricted by a fixed context window of size c, which limits the number of
tokens and, consequently, the characters they can process. This limitation manifests itself critically in
tasks that require the generation of extensive and logically coherent output structures, such as the
generation of large codebases. Therefore, although existing LLMs excel in generating short isolated
code snippets (Chen et al., 2021), they struggle to produce codebases that are both extensive and
internally consistent due to the information loss and contextual truncation imposed by the finite
context window. But practical code is rarely a short snippet, so this limitation undermines the
applicability of LLMs to solving real-world tasks that require the dynamic integration of multiple
outputs and attendance to distant information.
A natural solution is to extend the LLM agent with an external memory store. However, existing
methods primarily serve to extend the implicit knowledge of LLMs through an external corpus
(Zhong et al., 2022), to facilitate long conversational or document summarization tasks (Liang et al.,
2023), or to maintain precise values for variables (Hu et al., 2023). In the latter case, the approaches
simply interface the LLM with a dictionary or a database, which does not adjust to other tasks. In
other settings, current approaches adopt simplistic memory management strategies that append new
1Full code at https://github.com/samholt/L2MAC.
1


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
app.py
from flask import Flask, request, render_template
from user import User
from mock_db import MockDB
from contact import Contact
from message import Message
from group_chat import GroupChat
app = Flask(__name__)
db = MockDB()
@app.route('/')
def home():
return render_template('home.html'), 200
@app.route('/register', methods=['POST'])
def register():
data = request.get_json()
user = User(data['email'], data['password'])
contact = Contact(data['email'])
db.add(user.email, user)
db.add(contact.email, contact)
return render_template('register.html', message='User registered 
successfully'), 200
@app.route('/login', methods=['POST'])
def login():
data = request.get_json()
user = db.retrieve(data['email'])
if user and user.password == data['password']:
user.set_online_status(True)
return render_template('login.html', message='Login successful'), 
200
else:
return render_template('login.html', message='Invalid email or 
password'), 401
@app.route('/logout', methods=['POST'])
def logout():
data = request.get_json()
user = db.retrieve(data['email'])
if user and user.password == data['password']:
user.set_online_status(False)
return 'Logout successful', 200
else:
return 'Invalid email or password', 401
@app.route('/send_message', methods=['POST'])
def send_message():
data = request.get_json()
sender = db.retrieve(data['sender'])
receiver = db.retrieve(data['receiver'])
if sender and receiver and sender.password == data['password']:
message = Message(sender.email, receiver.email, data['content'])
if receiver.get_online_status():
receiver.receive_message(message.send_message())
else:
receiver.add_to_message_queue(message.send_message())
return 'Message sent', 200
else:
return 'Invalid email or password', 401
if __name__ == '__main__':
app.run(debug=True)
contact.py
class Contact:
def __init__(self, email):
self.email = email
self.blocked_contacts = set()
self.groups = {}
def block_contact(self, contact_email):
self.blocked_contacts.add(contact_email)
1. Setup structure
2. Create registration
3. Create profiles
4. Create Web interface
...
...
8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4Kkmh6rHgxWMF+wFtKJvNpl27yYbdSaGU/gcvHhTx6v/x5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSKUw6Lrfzsbm1vbObmGvuH9weHRcOjltGZVpxptMSaU7AT
VcioQ3UaDknVRzGgeSt4PR3dxvj7k2QiWPOEm5H9NBIiLBKFqp1RuHCk2/VHYr7gJknXg5KUORr/01QsVy2KeIJPUmK7npuhPqUbBJ8Ve5nhKWUjOuBdSxMac+NPF9fO
yKVQhIpbStBslB/T0xpbMwkDmxnTHFoVr25+J/XzTC69aciSTPkCVsuijJUJH56yQUmjOUE0so08LeStiQasrQBlS0IXirL6+TVrXiXVdqD9VyvZbHUYBzuIAr8OAG6
nAPDWgCgyd4hld4c5Tz4rw7H8vWDSefOYM/cD5/AMomjz0=</latexit>...
User Task
Code an online 
chat app with:
• Sign-up
• Web version
• Privacy settings
• Admin roles
1. Setup structure
[Write] file: app.py
from flask import Flask
app = Flask(__name__)
@app.route('/’)
def home(): ...
Valid code
Has instruction 
completed?
Complete
Summarize step
Core application 
has been setup
LLM Gen. 
Instructions
Control Unit
LLM Resp.
Context Window
File Store
Instruction 1.
Agent
File Store
...
File Store
app.py
from flask import Flask, jsonify
app = Flask(__name__)
users = {}
@app.route('/')
def home():
return jsonify({'message': 'Welcome to the User Management 
System'}), 200
if __name__ == '__main__’:
app.run(debug=True)
test_app.py
import pytest
from app import app, users
def test_home():
with app.test_client() as c:
resp = c.get('/’)
assert resp.status_code == 200
assert resp.get_json() == {'message': 'Welcome to the User 
Management System'}
def test_users():
assert isinstance(users, dict)
assert len(users) == 0
app.py
from flask import Flask, jsonify, request
app = Flask(__name__)
users = {}
@app.route('/')
def home():
return jsonify({'message': 'Welcome to the User Management 
System'}), 200
@app.route('/signup', methods=['POST'])
def signup():
data = request.get_json()
users[data['email']] = data['password’]
return jsonify({'message': 'User registered successfully'}), 200
@app.route('/recover', methods=['POST'])
def recover():
data = request.get_json()
if data['email'] in users:
return jsonify({'message': 'Password reset link has been sent to 
your email'}), 200
else:
return jsonify({'message': 'Email not found'}), 404
if __name__ == '__main__’:
app.run(debug=True)
test_app.py
import pytest
from app import app, users
def test_home():
with app.test_client() as c:
resp = c.get('/’)
assert resp.status_code == 200
assert resp.get_json() == {'message': 'Welcome to the User 
Management System'}
def test_users():
assert isinstance(users, dict)
assert len(users) == 0
def test_signup():
with app.test_client() as c:
resp = c.post('/signup', json={'email': 'test@test.com', 
'password': 'test123’})
assert resp.status_code == 200
assert resp.get_json() == {'message': 'User registered 
successfully’}
assert 'test@test.com' in users
assert users['test@test.com'] == 'test123'
def test_recover():
with app.test_client() as c:
resp = c.post('/recover', json={'email': 'test@test.com’})
assert resp.status_code == 200
assert resp.get_json() == {'message': 'Password reset link has 
been sent to your email’}
resp = c.post('/recover', json={'email': 'notfound@test.com’})
assert resp.status_code == 404
assert resp.get_json() == {'message': 'Email not found'}
2. Create registration
Control Unit
LLM Resp.
Context Window
Instruction 2.
Agent
[Read] file: app.py
file: app.py
from flask import Flask ...
[Write] file: app.py
... 
@app.route('/signup', 
methods=['POST'])
def signup():
data = request.get_json()
...
Error. Failed 
2 tests
[Write] app.py
Valid code
Complete ...
21. Test all code
Complete
Control Unit
LLM Resp.
Context Window
Instruction 21.
Agent
...
File Store
L2MAC: Large Language Model Automatic Computer
Figure 1: L2MAC Overview. Code-L2MAC is an instantiation of the LLM automatic computer
(L2MAC) framework, an LLM-based multi-agent system, here for extensive code generation. First, it
breaks down the user task into sequential instructions I. The Control Unit (CU) manages the LLM’s
context window for each instruction (agent) and interacts with the external memory file store through
read, write, and evaluate tools. It identifies and reads relevant files from the memory to generate or
update files per instruction (P2). This ensures proper conditioning of existing files without losing
vital context (P1). Automatic checks evaluate the LLM’s outputs for correctness and completion
(P3), with iterative error corrections involving both code syntactical checks of the code and running
self-generated unit tests to check desired functionality. Overall, this produces a complete large
codebase that fulfills the detailed user task in the file store. See Figure 5 for an expanded overview.
information sequentially without any provision for in-place modification. This makes any error
essentially irreversible, a critical limitation when generating codebases, and restricts the possibility of
adapting previously generated code as the task progresses. Compounding these shortcomings, these
methods do not include mechanisms for maintaining syntactic or semantic consistency within the
memory store, a vital requirement for the generation of coherent and interdependent code structures.
Thus, existing methods are ill-suited for extensive large code-generation tasks.
An effective method for extensive code generation requires the following three core properties:
(P1) Task-Oriented Context Management: At each computational step, the context for the LLM
agent should contain the information required to complete the current instruction. The context is
dynamically managed to prevent exceeding the fixed context window size of tokens.
(P2) Precise Read/Write Tools for Entire Memory: The LLM agent should possess read/write
operations that can interact precisely with the memory store to fetch and update relevant files.
(P3) Checking the Generated Output: The outputs of the LLM agent are checked for both
mistakes and when the current instruction has been completed. When mistakes are detected, such as
syntactically invalid code, or failing self-generated functional unit tests, they can attempt to be fixed
by iterating the discovered errors with the LLM agent.
With these considerations, we introduce L2MAC, the first practical LLM-based general-purpose
stored-program computer (von Neumann architecture) framework, an LLM-based multi-agent system,
and instantiate it for long code generation tasks as Code-L2MAC. A Control Unit (CU) orchestrates
the execution of the individual LLM agents and their interaction with the memory store, thus satisfying
the three stipulated properties. As outlined in Figure 1, an LLM agent first generates a task-oriented
instruction list I from a detailed user-specified task. The CU tailors the LLM agent’s context (P1),
so that it always includes the next unresolved instruction in I and information about the execution
of past iterations (agents), and declutters the context when approaching its limit. It also endows the
LLM agent with the ability to read and update any existing region of the memory store or extend it
with new outputs (P2). Furthermore, the CU plays a crucial role in checking the generated output
(P3). It feeds the LLM agent with syntactical checker errors and requests the LLM agent to generate
checks alongside generating output, here unit tests when generating code, which are verified at each
update of the memory file store to trigger corrective actions if needed, thereby ensuring that the
extensive output in memory is both syntactically and functionally consistent.
Contributions: 1
⃝We introduce the L2MAC framework, the first practical LLM-based general-
purpose stored-program automatic computer (von Neumann architecture) framework, an LLM-based
multi-agent system, for long output generation tasks. 2
⃝We provide a practical implementation of
this framework for code generation tasks called Code-L2MAC. This uses a Control Unit to control the
input and output of the LLM and the use of entire memory file store read/write tools and highlights
2


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
that code checks are key to correcting generated code that has syntactic and functional errors within
whilst conditioning on and integrating with the existing codebase.
3
⃝We empirically validate
Code-L2MAC, demonstrating its state-of-the-art capabilities in generating large codebases to solve
for the first time high-level system design tasks of creating entire applications and for generating
code achieving a 90.2% Pass@1 score on the HumanEval benchmark (Chen et al., 2021). Also, we
show L2MAC works for general-purpose extensive text-based tasks, such as writing an entire book.
Additionally, we gain insight and understanding of how Code-L2MAC can leverage tools to execute
and verify code by self-generating its own unit tests and use these to correct for generation errors
whilst generating large interrelated code structures that fulfill detailed complex user-specified task
feature requirements.
2
BACKGROUND
Large Language Models (LLMs). Essentially, an LLM is a probabilistic function l : Σc →P(Σ),
ingesting a list of elements of the alphabet Σ of lengths c and outputting a distribution over the
elements from which one is drawn (Vaswani et al., 2017). We refer to c as the length of the context.
For example, GPT-4 and GPT-3 have fixed context windows of 8, 192 and 4, 097, respectively.
Consequently, as discussed in Schuurmans (2023), an LLM at inference time can be formalized
as a finite-state machine (Dolfing & Hetherington, 2001). Given the well-known and exceptional
extension from finite-state machines to Turing machines Turing et al. (1936) that leads to the practical
framework of stored-program computers, it is natural to envision a parallel extension for LLMs.
Stored-Program Computer (SPC). Originally termed the von Neumann architecture (Von Neumann,
1945), is a combination of a processor (arithmetic and logic unit), a Control Unit (CU), and memory
capable of storing both instructions and data, SPCs set the foundation for modern computer design.
Where the control unit manages the interaction between the processor and the data. A fundamental
property of a general-purpose SPC is that it can be reprogrammed to automatically execute a program
(ideally to solve a specified task) without manual intervention2. Specifically, the CU extracts from
memory, data and instructions and correspondingly sets the input and state of the processor (P1)
and then overwrites a memory register with the output (Appendix A). Thus, the SPC extends the
processor’s arithmetic and logic abilities with the ability to manipulate memory (P2). An often
overlooked but vital function of the CU is error-checking of the processor’s output (P3). “Stochastic”
effects of temperature, voltage change, or radiation can cause errors in a processor (Nicolaidis, 2010),
including misspecified inputs leading to overflows. Therefore, CUs implement output checks such as
parity bit checks and usually corresponding error-correcting mechanisms (Harris & Harris, 2010).
3
L2MAC FRAMEWORK
Now we outline the L2MAC framework for the first practical LLM-based SPC, with an instantiation
for coding illustrated in Figure 1. L2MAC consists of three main components: the LLM processor, the
memory file store, and the Control Unit (CU) that controls the flow of the execution, thus endowing
the LLM agent with read-and-write capabilities, among other capacities—this is illustrated in Figure 2.
Some choices are deliberately left open to differentiate the key functionalities needed from how we
tackle them in our implementation for code generation, which we detail in the next section.
3.1
LLM-BASED PROCESSOR
An inherent element of L2MAC is the Large Language Model (LLM), which is responsible for the
actual generation of the output for the task. An LLM can be visualized as a more complex atomic
unit of computation f : Σc →P(Σ), where, for instance, |Σ| = 50, 257 tokens (Radford et al.,
2019)3; rather than being restricted to only deterministic arithmetic and logical operations on binary
sequences, that is, f : {0, 1}64 ×{0, 1}64 →{0, 1}64, e.g., for a standard 64-bit processor (Hennessy
& Patterson, 2011). This allows for a more flexible and powerful (yet more expensive) computation
unit, which can be used to solve a different range of tasks.
2As a side note, the Church-Turing Thesis posits that both Universal Turing Machines (UTMs) and SPCs
are capable of simulating each other and, therefore, are models of the same class of computational processes
Von Neumann (1945) (Appendix A.1). Recently, it has been shown that augmenting an LLM with an external
read-and-write memory allows it to simulate a UTM (Schuurmans, 2023). However, we do not aim to reproduce
the capabilities of the current hardware SPC in arithmetic and logic operations but rather explore the powerful
abilities of LLM-SPCs as automatic computers.
3The token vocabulary size is an implementation detail of the underlying LLM used.
3


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Invoke
Tool?
Called Step 
Completed?
1.  Summarize step output to Mrs and clear Ct. 
2.  Load next I(k)aa, and start new Ct={I(k),Mrs}
Append cycle 
message Mc
Would exceed 
context?
1.  Unwind oldest messages M, till 
2.  Summarize progress to Mrs and clear Ct.
3.  Restart same I(k), with Ct={I(k),Mrs}  
M
Mrs
">AB/XicbVDLSsNAFL3xWesrPnZuBluhbkpS8LEsuNFdBfuANpbJdNIOnUzCzESoIfgrblwo4tb/cOfmLRZaOuBgcM593LPH
DfkTGnL+jaWldW19YLG8XNre2dXNv6WCSBLaJAEPZMfFinImaFMzWknlBT7Lqdtd3yV+e0HKhULxJ2ehNTx8VAwjxGsU6lvH
pZ7PtYjgnl8k9zHlfFpUi72zZJVtaZAi8TOSQlyNPrmV28QkMinQhOleraVqidGEvNCKdJsRcpGmIyxkPaTanAPlVOPE2foJNU
GSAvkOkTGk3V3xsx9pWa+G46mUV814m/ud1I+1dOjETYaSpILNDXsSRDlBWBRowSYnmk5RgIlmaFZERlpjotLCsBHv+y4ukVav
a59Wz21qpXsnrKMARHEMFbLiAOlxDA5pA4BGe4RXejCfjxXg3PmajS0a+cwB/YHz+AxjlDw=</latexit>
I(k)
Mrs
I(k+1)
Yes
Mr
Mf
Yes
No
Mc
No
Yes
No
Append messages
Read/Write
/Evaluate D
>ACnicbVDJSgNBEO2JW4zbqEcvrUEICGFG3E4SiAePEcwCmUno6XSJj0L3TVCmMzZi7/ixYMiXv0Cb/6NneWgiQ8KHu9VUVXP
iwRXYFnfRmZpeWV1Lbue29jc2t4xd/dqKowlZVUailA2PKY4AGrAgfBGpFkxPcEq3uD8tivPzCpeBjcwzBirk96Ae9ySkBLbfNwV
G4BdsJIxAo7N0wAaSflVgIndpqO8DWmbTNvFa0J8CKxZySPZqi0zS+nE9LYZwFQZRq2lYEbkIkcCpYmnNixSJCB6THmpoGxGfKT
SavpPhYKx3cDaWuAPBE/T2REF+poe/pTp9AX817Y/E/rxlD98pNeBDFwAI6XdSNBYQj3PBHS4ZBTHUhFDJ9a2Y9okFHR6OR2CPf
/yIqmdFu2L4vndWb5UmMWRQfoCBWQjS5RCd2iCqoih7RM3pFb8aT8WK8Gx/T1owxm9lHf2B8/gDdL5mo</latexit>
|Ct ⊕∆Ct+1| > c
Evaluate D
Pass?
Yes
No
D
D
Zitn4L4wXc9soeXI6yud8IU=">ACDHicbVDJSgNBFOyJW4xb
1KOXwagIQpgRt2MgHrwIEcwCmRh6Om+SJj0L3W+UMwHePFXvHh
QxKsf4M2/sbMcNLGgoaiqx+tXbiS4Qsv6NjJz8wuLS9nl3Mrq2
vpGfnOrpsJYMqiyUISy4VIFgdQRY4CGpE6rsC6m6/PTr9yAV
D4NbHETQ8mk34B5nFLXUzhecSxBI20n5LsEjO0PHAEeUinDBy
e5bksnzemUVbRGMGeJPSEFMkGlnf9yOiGLfQiQCapU07YibCVUI
mcC0pwTK4go69MuNDUNqA+qlYyOSc19rXRML5T6BWiO1N8TCfWV
GviuTvoUe2raG4r/ec0YvYtWwoMoRgjYeJEXCxNDc9iM2eESGI
qBJpRJrv9qsh6VlKHub1iCPX3yLKkdF+2z4unNSaG0N6kjS3bIL
jkNjknJXJFKqRKGHkz+SVvBlPxovxbnyMoxljMrN/sD4/AF
3bpsr</latexit>∆Ct+1  {Mr}
∆Ct+1  
∆Ct+1 ⊕Mf
∆Ct+1  
∆Ct+1 ⊕Mcc
>ACKHicbVBNSwMxEM36WetX1aOXYFUEoeyKXzcL9eBFqGBV6NYlm85qMLtZklmlLP05XvwrXkQU6dVfYlp70OqDgcd7M8nMC1Mp
DLpuzxkbn5icmi7MFGfn5hcWS0vLF0ZlmkODK6n0VcgMSJFAwVKuEo1sDiUcBne1fr+5T1oI1Ryjp0UWjG7SUQkOEMrBaUj/xgks
iCvXe47XW7m76ECJnW6oH6Ph216avUpkZehrkEXSLQansVtwB6F/iDUmZDFEPSq9+W/EshgS5ZMY0PTfFVs40Ci7tg35mIGX8jt
1A09KExWBa+eDQLt2wSptGStKkA7UnxM5i43pxKHtjBnemlGvL/7nNTOMDlu5SNIMIeHfH0WZpKhoPzXaFho4yo4ljGthd6X8lmn
G0WbD8EbPfkvudipePuVvbPdcnV9GEeBrJI1skU8ckCq5ITUSYNw8kieyRt5d56cF+fD6X23jnDmRXyC87nFwBApdc=</latexi
t>∆Ct+1  
∆Ct+1 ⊕Mfe
Ct  ;
Ct+1  Ct ⊕∆Ct+1
Ct  ;
Ct+1  {I(k+1), Mrs}
Ct+1  {I(k), Mrs}
|Ct| < b
Control Unit : Control Flow Diagram
LLM Processor
Context Window
File Store
Figure 2: Control Unit—Control flow diagram for one dialog turn t. Here this executes one
current instruction I(k). It starts by loading the first instruction into the context window C0 ←{I(0)}
and iterates it automatically until all instructions in I have been executed. First, Ct is processed by
the LLM Processor PLLM(Ct) to output Mr. The CU stores this in a buffer ∆Ct+1 ←{Mr}, and
checks if Mr has called a tool, and if so, it executes the tool with the specified input in Mr, which
includes reading, writing and evaluating E(D) the file store D—outputting Mf, which is appended to
the buffer ∆Ct+1. The CU performs additional control flow as detailed in Section 3.3, for checking if
an instruction has been completed, continuing an instruction beyond the context window (P1), and
continuing executing the current instruction.
Leveraging an LLM within the L2MAC framework offers distinct advantages to exploit and challenges
to overcome, categorized to the properties of P1, P2, and P3. Here, L2MAC benefits from the LLM’s
awareness of external tools with which it can interact with assisted by the Control Unit. This
capability enables requests for memory reads/writes (P2) and additional output checks (P3).
In contrast, the use of an LLM also imposes constraints that need to be addressed, such as the
impediments of a limited context window to prevent incongruencies caused by the lack of attention
to distant information; that is, we have to handle context correctly (P1). Furthermore, the stochastic
nature of LLM’s output (P(Σ)) is a significant risk in situations where precision and correctness are
key. Thus, crucial to effectively updating an interrelated memory is the ability to enforce periodic
checks on its output to ensure a level of correctness and consistency (P3) (Liventsev et al., 2023).
3.2
MEMORY
Following an SPC, we distinguish between two types of memory, that of the instruction registry I and
the file store D. On the one hand, the instruction registry I contains the prompt program that will be
used to determine the state of the processor. In L2MAC, given the LLM processor, this corresponds
mainly to the strings that will be incorporated into the context of the LLM agent at each execution. In
a basic implementation, I lists the sequential steps needed to complete the task, either specified by
the user or automatically generated—where each step will be executed by a separate LLM agent. On
the other hand, the file store D stores the rest of the information relevant for the processor to read,
write, and evaluate, with the final output ultimately stored in D.
3.3
CONTROL UNIT
The control unit (CU, cf. Figure 2) is responsible for managing the context window for the LLM,
encompassing both its inputs and outputs, executing the LLM, checking its outputs for errors, and
enabling it to call tools (functions)—including reading and writing. We further detail the CU,
including a block diagram figure and pseudocode for its operation in Appendix B. First, we start with
how the CU interacts with the LLM.
3.3.1
TASK-ORIENTED CONTEXT MANAGEMENT (P1)
Context formalism. The CU uses the LLM as a multi-turn dialog system, filling its context window
C with a combination of messages m which can come from the user Mu, an LLM response Mr, a
function (tool) output Mf, or the CU Mc, so that m ∈{Mu, Mr, Mf, Mc}. Consequently, at turn t
then the context window4 Ct ∈List(M) is of the form Ct = (m1, m2, . . . , mnt).
To make L2MAC an automatic computer5, the CU prompts the LLM to fill the initially empty
instruction registry I with a list of instructions {I(1), . . . , I(K)} where each will be executed in
4Given a set A, let List(A) = {(ai)n
i=1, ai ∈A ∀i ∈[n], n ∈N} denote the set of lists of arbitrary length
composed of elements in A.
5We define what we mean by an ‘automatic’ computer in Appendix A.2.
4


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
the LLM processor6. L2MAC then loads an empty context window of an LLM agent with the first
instruction C0 ←{I(0)} and iterates the CU control flow loop (Figure 2) until all instructions have
been achieved. The LLM can signal when the current instruction I(i) has been completed through
calling a special function ‘step_complete’ at which point the CU evaluates the file store D using its
evaluator module E (discussed in Section 3.3.3) to check for any introduced errors. If none are found,
it asks the LLM to summarize the generated output in the current context window Ct as a message
Mrs and resets the context window as Ct+1 ←{I(k+1), Mrs}.
Overcoming the fixed context window constraint. The input to the LLM cannot exceed the context
window constraint c: the combined length of the initial context Ct and the additional messages buffer
∆Ct+1 = {m0, . . . , mn} must fit in the context window, that is7, |Ct ⊕∆Ct+1| ≤c. However, the
length of ∆Ct+1 is not known a priori, so the CU should have a way of handling the cases where
∆Ct+1 exceeds the context margin c −|Ct|. This can be achieved through a combination of three
different strategies: (1) minimize the occurrence by promoting the task at each time step to be small
enough and economizing the filling of the context C; and if the situation occurs, (2) store in the file
store D as much relevant output as possible from the current Ct and (3) update or include a new
summary message with I(k) as in-context tuning for the next iteration.
Regarding (1), through appropriate crafting Ct, the CU can prompt the LLM to plan sub-steps for
the current instruction (most likely the original task prompt given by the user) and then target each
sub-step in the following iterations. For illustration, in a coding setting, (2) can be achieved by
storing the generated code so far to avoid rewriting it in the next iteration, and (3) by initializing a
new prompt with a summary Mrs of the current progress and helpful information to complete the
current instruction, e.g., which files should be read or modified, or the current progress made fixing
errors—(3) is further detailed at the bottom right of Figure 2.
3.3.2
PRECISE READ/WRITE TOOLS FOR ENTIRE MEMORY (P2)
The need for a reading mechanism that retrieves the relevant information at each iteration is evident
and has been reasonably explored in previous literature. In contrast, previous work on memory (as
shown in Section 5) has paid little attention to the writing component, which gets mostly reduced to
the appending of new prompts and LLM outputs (Liang et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2022; Cheng et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2022) or updating the values of very structured and thus restrictive forms of memory
(Modarressi et al., 2023), e.g., variables or tables (Hu et al., 2023).
These approaches make sense for summarization, dialogs, and database manipulation tasks but are
not suitable for long interconnected output generation tasks, such as generating large codebases for
system design tasks. Indeed, in such settings, the possibility of downstream subtasks I(j) demanding
extensions of previous outputs (such as modules in a codebase) due to imperfect planning, plus the
non-determinism and possible hallucination of LLMs, make it probable to require modifications of
previously stored memories D to rectify these defects, as shown in Section 6.2.
In L2MAC it is thus key to implement read/write interactions with any part of the memory. We want
the agent to be able to scan on demand D, retrieve parts of the memory that it considers relevant, and
potentially update them. In the next Section 4, we detail our implementation of an LLM with a write
component that allows it not only to add new information to D but also to delete and update any of
its contents, an essential element that allows L2MAC to succeed in long output generation tasks.
3.3.3
CHECKING THE GENERATED OUTPUT (P3)
As discussed in Section 3.1 and 3.3.2, the intrinsic stochasticity of LLMs and the well-known
phenomenon of hallucination (OpenAI, 2023) make it likely that incoherent or erroneous outputs
occur during long interactions, which can be disastrous, for example, in coding. More profoundly,
changes (e.g., to a function) to satisfy a given instruction I(j) can hamper the solution to formerly
completed instructions I(i), i < j. Therefore, it is essential to incorporate two key checks, one to
check the generated outputs for errors using a given evaluator module E, and the other to check when
the current instruction has been completed in the current context Ct (c.f. top diamond in Figure 2).
6We consider the simplest case of sequential instructions of a prompt program and discuss more complicated
control flow paradigms in Appendix I.
7We use ⊕: List(A) × List(A) →List(A) as the concatenation of two lists on the set A. We abuse notation
by considering any a ∈A as a singleton {a}.
5


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Error checking and error correction. Using a given evaluator module E, which can process the
existing file store D, i.e., E(D), allows when run, errors to be detected and returned to the LLM
as an evaluator message Mfe. The evaluator is domain-specific; for example, in coding tasks, this
can correspond to syntactical code checkers or self-generated unit tests that verify the correctness
of the output for an instruction I(i). Crucially, these self-generated unit tests also help test the
existing functionality of previously generated instructions I(j). Naturally, evaluation checks should
be enforced on the file store D after each writing operation to ensure that new additions are correct
and consistent with previous files. These result in messages Mfe that are provided for in-context
learning so that the LLM can correct the errors, ∆Ct+1 ←∆Ct+1 ⊕Mfe, and iterate by rewriting D
until the evaluator checks pass, if any are present.
Checking for current instruction completion. To ensure continued execution in a multi-turn
dialogue LLM system until completion, we request the LLM to decide on the next step to take, which
can involve executing a tool (Wang et al., 2023a). This is achieved through a cycle prompt message
Mcc that also asks the LLM if the instruction has been completed. Cycle prompting is necessary to
account for different instructions requiring a variable number of turns to complete, and to protect
against hallucinations where the LLM agent only discusses the instruction I(i) and does not generate
a solution or store it in memory. Overall, this ensures that the LLM provides a solution for the given
instruction within the current context (P3).
4
CODE-L2MAC
Now, we use our LLM automatic computer (L2MAC) framework and instantiate it to complete large
codebase generation tasks, which we call Code-L2MAC. We distinguish the general-purpose task
long-generation framework from the code instantiation to detach the core components from task
domain decisions that can be appropriately adapted to other task domains. We provide the full details
of the implementation in Appendix C; yet here we highlight some notable design decisions on the
memory layout (in particular, D) and the read logic. There are different potentially valid alternatives
for the read component in L2MAC (e.g., Wu et al. (2022)). However, to promote a transparent read
component, we make the following choices.
We specify the memory file store D, be composed solely of files, each shorter than the residual margin
of the context window after accounting for preliminary messages in any iteration8 and instruct the
LLM agent to assign each file a semantically meaningful descriptive path. For example, a file name
models/user.py suggests that it contains the data model for the user class. This choice is not
only valuable for a human reader but also crucial for our Read-and-Write implementation, as it allows
the LLM to infer the content of existing files D and prioritize those that it might need to read to
complete its current instruction. Given the list of file paths, the LLM can request that the contents of
any be appended into its context Ct. Although the path-to-content link is not absolute, empirically,
this read implementation can perform well (Section 6), when coupled with the context management
logic of the CU. Specifically, if the LLM reads the content of certain files and reaches the context
window limit, it can include in its subsequent iteration summary indications of which files should be
read and which should be excluded in order to generate the code necessary to complete the current
instruction. This approach thereby enables the LLM to systematically scan all memory, with the
scanning order guided by priorities previously established from the file path names.
5
RELATED WORK
In the following, we review the existing memory-augmented LLM-based approaches, focusing on
approaches applicable to completing large-generation coding tasks—and summarize their main
differences in Table 1. We provide an extended discussion of additional related works, including
those of other single-turn code generation methods and memory-augmented LLMs in Appendix D.
Single LLMs. These are limited to generating an output of the maximum size of the context window
and form the most popular baseline widely used for coding. Examples include Codex (Chen et al.,
2021), GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023), GPT-Engineer (Osika, 2023) and Code LLama (Rozière et al., 2023).
Reflecting LLMs. These enhance the performance of LLMs by having the LLM reflect retrospectively
on the output of an evaluator and the actions taken (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023). These
verbal reflections are used as in-context learning (Dong et al., 2022) to improve performance when
attempting the task again. By using a validator, such as self-generated unit tests, this simple idea has
8More precisely, no longer than half such margin to ensure the LLM can rewrite any file within its context.
6


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 1: Comparison of related works. Columns: Context Management (P1)—can it generate a larger
output than c, and if so, can it access the necessary files to generate the next file correctly without
knowledge of the file falling out of context? Precise Read/Write for Entire Memory (P2)—can it write
to the full memory and update it in any order? Checking the Generated Output (P3)?—can it check for
mistakes in the output? References:[1](Richards, 2023)[2](Shrestha & Watkins, 2023)[3](Nakajima,
2023)[4](Chen et al., 2021)[5](Osika, 2023)[6](Shinn et al., 2023)[7](Madaan et al., 2023).
Approach
Methods
Context Management (P1)?
Precise Read/Write for
Checking the Generated
Entire Memory (P2)?
Output (P3)?
Autonomous Agent LLMs with memory
[1,2,3]
✗—forgets which files were generated
✓
✗—No checks
Single LLMs
[4,5]
✗—limited to c
✗
✗
Reflecting LLMs
[6,7]
✗
✗—limited to append-only
read always memory
✓
Code-L2MAC
This work
✓
✓
✓
provided state-of-the-art small code snippet generation performance (Shinn et al., 2023). Still, the
output of these approaches is also confined to the context window, whereas Code-L2MAC uses an
evaluator not only for in-context learning but also for consistency of the codebase.
Memory-augmented LLMs. Most work on this topic focuses on long conversational/text summa-
rization tasks (Liang et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2023), or mathematical/database
reasoning (Hu et al., 2023). Methods in the first group usually focus exclusively on the read com-
ponent of memory. The same happens with (Wu et al., 2022), which, through k-NN retrieval for
next-token predictions, enhances perplexity for multiple tasks, including coding. However, read-only
implementations are sensitive to the inconsistency and “stochasticity” of LLMs, which might break
code, that the method cannot then fix. Modarressi et al. (2023) proposes updating memories, but
they use tuples with two subjects and their relation, so they have no clear application to coding tasks.
Similarly, the memory of mathematical/database reasoning methods use a dictionary of values or a
structured database, which again is not applicable to different settings (e.g., coding).
Autonomous agent LLMs with memory. Richards (2023); Shrestha & Watkins (2023); Nakajima
(2023) formulate a fully autonomous LLM-based agent in a reinforcement learning environment
to complete a given task (Wang et al., 2023a). They build and update their own plans from a few
user-given high-level goals. When coding, these agents reprogram and reformulate their step plan at
runtime without safeguarding the original intentions, resulting in frequent deviations from the task
(Wang et al., 2023a; Sato et al., 2023). In comparison, Code-L2MAC is designed to be automatic,
i.e., it fulfills the detailed user-specified task without altering or forgetting parts. The only existing
autonomous agent LLM with applicable memory capable of writing, reading, and executing code
is AutoGPT (Richards, 2023). It tackles the context window constraint by iteratively summarizing
previous actions completed at every k-th turn into a rolling summary kept in the context. Like other
agents, the first step of AutoGPT is to summarize the user-specified task into a name, role, and five
one-sentence goals for the agent to complete; this summary is kept in context throughout execution.
AutoGPT and associated methods have two key limitations compared to Code-L2MAC (cf. Figure 3):
(1) they compress the user-specified task into a mere six-sentence description, and (2) they compress
the previous action history, thus losing crucial information. In code generation tasks, (2) indicates
forgetting which files exist and their content, which is compounded by continual re-planning.
6
EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate Code-L2MAC and verify that it significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods for generating code and large codebases for system design tasks. Due to the absence of an
existing benchmark for large codebase generation tasks, we introduce one to enable comparison with
other methods. Furthermore, there are also no automated tools to validate the generation of codebases
for system design tasks either, therefore we propose evaluation metrics to compare the methods.
Benchmark tasks. We evaluate against three standard system design codebase generation tasks whose
prompt questions are taken from real-world system design interview questions (Xu & Lam, 2020;
Martin, 2023), and the HumanEval benchmark (Chen et al., 2021); with all details in Appendix E.
Evaluation metrics. Large-scale codebase generation is unique in that the generated code can satisfy
the high-level user-specified task feature requirements through various possible implementation
approaches. To quantify the degree to which the user-specified features in the initial prompt are
effectively implemented in the generated code, we introduce a performance metric named Features %.
This metric numerically represents the proportion of input features that are fully and functionally
implemented in the output codebase. The Features % is obtained by using a separate GPT-4 API
call, which iteratively examines the entire generated code to verify the functional implementation of
7


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 2: Codebase generation system design task results showing the percentage of functional features
specified that are fully implemented (Features %), the number of syntactical errors in the generated
code (# Errors), the number of lines of code (LOC), and the number of passing tests (Tests Passed).
Code-L2MAC fully implements the highest percentage of user-specified task feature requirements
across all tasks by generating fully functional code that has minimal syntactical errors and a high
number of passing self-generated unit tests. The results are averaged over 10 random seeds.
URL Shortener App
Online Social Media App
Online Chat App
Method
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passed
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passed
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passed
↑
↓
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
↓
↑
GPT4
53.6±10.5
0±0
119±21.1
2.56±0.95
19.5±8.28
4.09±3.32
116±31.5
0.818±0.785
11±2.26
0.3±0.346
127±24.1
1.2±1
CodeT
52.9±6.74
0.05±0.105
110±11.8
3.6±0.513
19.5±5.19
0.4±0.603
106±17.7
2.6±1.76
10.5±4.61
0±0
91.6±25.9
3.32±1.57
Self-Refine
47.9±8.53
0.05±0.105
124±15.7
3.65±1.15
16.4±2.62
0.938±0.714
110±19.6
1.81±0.938
14.2±4.19
0.211±0.304
111±13.8
1.42±0.927
Reflexion
38.8±6.02
0.1±0.209
96.2±9.11
2.35±0.631
15.2±8.05
2.53±1.69
122±24
1.33±2.44
10.2±3.08
0±0
76±6.88
2.85±0.822
AutoGPT
25.3±19.6
0±0
136±41.9
3.3±1.91
33.3±18
0.6±0.369
148±35.5
3±2.86
23.1±11.8
1.85±2.47
220±65.8
3.08±3.34
Code-L2MAC
91.6±8.22
0±0
330±47.6
14±6.71
82.4±14.6
0±0
395±52.9
18.3±6.8
59.4±25.9
0±0
374±123
18.8±9.11
all input features, counting the number of fully implemented features. We quote this as a percentage
of the features implemented over the total features specified by the user. A detailed description and a
motivating example of this implementation are provided in Appendix G. We also incorporate standard
code generation evaluation metrics (Hasemer, 2018), such as the number of lines of code generated
LOC and the number of errors # Errors in the codebase as determined by a code syntactical analyzer
(Thénault, 2023). Furthermore, each method is instructed to generate unit tests to check that the
generated code is valid; therefore, we quote how many of these self-generated unit tests pass as Tests
Passed. We give each metric with their 95% confidence intervals throughout. Moreover, we detail
these metrics and the experimental setup in more detail in Appendix G.
Benchmark methods. To assess whether Code-L2MAC is state-of-the-art, we compare it with the
most competitive and popular autonomous agent LLM with memory AutoGPT (Richards, 2023),
based on GPT4 and capable of reading, writing, and persisting, using a vector embedding memory to
complete given tasks autonomously. We also compare with code reflecting LLM methods of CodeT
(Chen et al., 2022), Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023), Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) and a single
GPT4 LLM (GPT4) (OpenAI, 2023)—we make all these competitive by providing them with the
same tools that Code-L2MAC uses. We provide the method implementation details, hyperparameters,
and experimental details in Appendix F.
6.1
MAIN RESULTS
We evaluated all the benchmark methods across all our system design tasks with results tabulated
in Table 2. Code-L2MAC fully implements the highest percentage of user-specified task feature
requirements across all tasks by generating fully functional code that has minimal syntactical errors
and a high number of passing self-generated unit tests—therefore, Code-L2MAC is state-of-the-
art for completing these system design large codebase generation benchmark tasks. We further
evaluated Code-L2MAC on the standard HumanEval benchmark (Chen et al., 2021) and observe that
it achieves a state-of-the-art score of 90.2% Pass@1 (Appendix H.1). Also, we show L2MAC works
for general-purpose extensive text-based tasks, such as writing an entire book (Appendix H.2).
6.2
INSIGHT EXPERIMENTS
This section provides an in-depth empirical analysis of the efficacy of Code-L2MAC compared to
its benchmark counterparts, AutoGPT and GPT-4. Specifically, we examine the core properties we
suggested an effective extensive code generation framework should possess: task-oriented context
management (P1), precise read/write tools (P2), and output error checking and correcting (P3).
Can Code-L2MAC correctly perform task-oriented context management? (P1). To explore if
the benchmarked methods during operation contain the information within their context to complete
the task directly, we adapted our Features % metric to count the number of user-specified task feature
requirements that are retained within the methods task instructions instead, i.e., those instructions
that are eventually fed into its context window during its operation, as shown in Figure 3 (a).
Empirically, we observe that Code-L2MAC is able to retain a high number of user-specified task
feature requirements within its instructions I and perform instruction-oriented long-running tasks.
We note that AutoGPT also initially translates the user-specified task feature requirements into task
instructions; however, it does so with higher compression—condensing the information into a mere
six-sentence description. This process results in the loss of crucial task information necessary for
completing the overall task correctly, such that it aligns with the detailed user-specified task.
Can Code-L2MAC perform precise read/write operations for the entire file store (P2)? We wish
to understand, during the operation of executing a task instruction, if Code-L2MAC can understand the
existing generated code files within the codebase—which could have been created many instructions
8


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
0
20
40
60
80
100
% Episode Completion (Normalized Steps)
0
20
40
60
80
100
% Feature Req. Retained
0
50
Code-L2MAC
0
5
Number of Tests
AutoGPT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
% Episode Completion (Normalized Steps)
0
2
GPT4
0
20
40
60
80
100
% Episode Completion (Normalized Steps)
0
5
10
15
# Errors
Tests Passed
Tests Failed
Code-L2MAC
AutoGPT
GPT4
Code-L2MAC
AutoGPT
GPT4
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: Experimental Insight during operation—of generating a codebase for an Online Chat
App task. (a) Percentage of user-specified feature requirements that are retained within the methods
task instructions and used in context. (b) Number of syntactical errors within the codebase. (c)
Stacked histograms of passing and failing self-generated unit tests.
ago, and through its understanding, create new files that interrelate with the existing files, and most
importantly update existing code files as new features are implemented. To derive insight, we plot a
heatmap of the reading, writing, and when files are created at each write operation step during one
episode in Figure 4. We observe that Code-L2MAC has an understanding of the existing generated
code that allows it to update existing code files, even those originally created many instruction steps
ago, and can view the files when it is not certain and update the files through writing to the files. In
contrast, AutoGPT often only writes to files once, when initially creating them, and can only update
files that it knows about that are retained within its current context window. Although it also has
a read file tool, it often forgets about the files that it created many iterations ago due to its context
window handling approach of summarizing the oldest dialog messages in its context window, i.e., a
continual lossy compression of the previous progress made during operation of completing the task.
0
20
40
60
Episode Steps
0
10
File No.
Code-L2MAC
0
10
20
30
Episode Steps
0
10
File No.
AutoGPT
File not created
File exists
File written to
File read from
Figure 4: Heatmap of file access.
Indicating reading, writing, and
when files are created at each write
operation step during one episode
for the Online Chat App task.
Can Code-L2MAC check the generated output and error
correct (P3)? When using a probabilistic model (LLM) as a
generator to output code, errors can naturally occur in its out-
puts. Therefore, we wish to verify if, when errors do appear, the
respective benchmark methods can error-correct the codebase.
We plot the number of syntactical errors in the codebase during
a run where errors are made in Figure 3 (b). We observe that
Code-L2MAC can correctly error correct the previously gen-
erated codebase that has errors contained within, which could
arise from syntactical errors from the last file written or other
files that depend on the most recent file written, which now
contain errors. It does this by being presented with the error
output when it does arise and modifying the codebase to re-
solve the error whilst still completing the current instruction. In
contrast, AutoGPT cannot detect when an error in the codebase
has been made and continues operating, which can compound
the number of errors forming within the codebase.
Moreover, Code-L2MAC generates unit tests alongside the functional code and uses these as an error
checker to inspect the functionalities of the codebase as it is generated and can use these errors to fix
the codebase to pass unit tests that now fail after updating part of an existing file. We show this in
Figure 3 (c) and observe that AutoGPT, whilst prompted to also write unit tests for all code generated,
is unable to use these tests as an integrity error check, which could be compounded by the observation
that AutoGPT forgets which files it has previously created and hence unable to modify the existing
forgotten code files as new modifications are made, leading to incompatible code files.
7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present L2MAC, the first LLM-based general-purpose stored-program computer
framework that effectively and scalably augments LLMs with a memory store for long output
generation tasks where this was not previously successfully achieved. Specifically, Code-L2MAC, an
application for long code generation tasks, surpasses existing solutions—and is an immensely useful
tool for rapid development. This work is not without limitations. L2MAC’s performance is inherently
bounded by its underlying LLM across various tasks, from planning to tool use. Further, the current
design imposes an implicit constraint on the scale of the codebase by listing all file names within the
context window, which could readily be improved. These, and among many other aspects such as
complex instruction flows, re-programming the instructions, and interpretable prompt programs pose
exciting open directions for future work to build upon as detailed in Appendix I.
9


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Ethics statement. This paper proposes the first practical framework for an LLM-based stored-
program computer and instantiates a version to generate large codebases, named Code-L2MAC.
However, misuse or use of such a tool with an incorrectly specified task could lead to undesirable
outputs. Furthermore, due to the use of an LLM, such a tool is prone to hallucinations, and hence,
such results should always have a content filter on the final output.
Reproducibility statement. All code is available at https://github.com/samholt/L2M
AC. Seeking full reproducibility, we include an extensive appendix with all implementation and
experimental details to re-create the benchmark tasks and baseline methods. These are detailed in
the following: for benchmark task environment details, see Appendix E; for benchmark method
implementation details, see Appendix F; regarding Code-L2MAC implementation details, for high-
level details, see Appendix C, and for low-level details, see Appendix F.1; and for evaluation metric
details, see Appendix G.
Acknowledgements. The authors would like to acknowledge and thank their corresponding funders,
where SH and ML are funded by AstraZeneca. Moreover, we would like to warmly thank all the
anonymous reviewers, alongside research group members of the van der Schaar lab (www.vander
schaar-lab.com) and Andrew Rashbass, for their valuable input, comments, and suggestions as
the paper was developed.
REFERENCES
Elif Akata, Lion Schulz, Julian Coda-Forno, Seong Joon Oh, Matthias Bethge, and Eric Schulz.
Playing repeated games with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16867, 2023.
Anthropic. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku, 2024. URL https://www.anthro
pic.com/news/claude-3-family.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
Ned Batchelder and Contributors to Coverage.py. Coverage.py: The code coverage tool for Python.
https://github.com/nedbat/coveragepy, 2023.
Jonas Bayer, Christoph Benzmüller, Kevin Buzzard, Marco David, Leslie Lamport, Yuri Matiyasevich,
Lawrence Paulson, Dierk Schleicher, Benedikt Stock, and Efim Zelmanov. Mathematical proof
between generations, 2022.
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer,
2020.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Mil-
lican, George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego
de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren
Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol
Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack W. Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent Sifre. Improving
language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens, 2022.
Maarten Breddels. Solara. https://github.com/widgetti/solara, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Aydar Bulatov, Yury Kuratov, and Mikhail Burtsev. Recurrent memory transformer. In S. Koyejo,
S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 11079–11091. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. URL https:
//proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/47e288629a6
996a17ce50b90a056a0e1-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen, and Denny Zhou. Large language models as
tool makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17126, 2023.
10


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen.
Codet: Code generation with generated tests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10397, 2022.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Xin Cheng, Yankai Lin, Xiuying Chen, Dongyan Zhao, and Rui Yan.
Decouple knowledge
from paramters for plug-and-play language modeling.
In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 14288–14308, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.901. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.901.
Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. Can large language models be an alternative to human
evaluations? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01937, 2023.
Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever. Generating long sequences with sparse
transformers, 2019.
Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea Gane, Tamas
Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, David Belanger, Lucy
Colwell, and Adrian Weller. Rethinking attention with performers, 2022.
David Dohan, Winnie Xu, Aitor Lewkowycz, Jacob Austin, David Bieber, Raphael Gontijo Lopes,
Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, Rif A Saurous, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, et al. Language model
cascades. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10342, 2022.
Hans JGA Dolfing and I Lee Hetherington. Incremental language models for speech recognition using
finite-state transducers. In IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding,
2001. ASRU’01., pp. 194–197. IEEE, 2001.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, and
Zhifang Sui. A survey for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving factual-
ity and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14325,
2023.
Angeliki Giannou, Shashank Rajput, Jy yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Jason D. Lee, and Dimitris
Papailiopoulos. Looped transformers as programmable computers, 2023.
Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural turing machines, 2014.
Mandy Guo, Joshua Ainslie, David Uthus, Santiago Ontanon, Jianmo Ni, Yun-Hsuan Sung, and
Yinfei Yang. LongT5: Efficient text-to-text transformer for long sequences. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022, pp. 724–736, Seattle, United States, July
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-naacl.55. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-naacl.55.
Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V Chawla, Olaf Wiest,
and Xiangliang Zhang. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and
challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680, 2024.
Rui Hao, Linmei Hu, Weijian Qi, Qingliu Wu, Yirui Zhang, and Liqiang Nie. Chatllm network: More
brains, more intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12998, 2023.
David Harris and Sarah Harris. Digital design and computer architecture. Morgan Kaufmann, 2010.
Tony Hasemer. Syntactic debugging of procedural programs. In Novice Programming Environments,
pp. 227–241. Routledge, 2018.
John L Hennessy and David A Patterson. Computer architecture: a quantitative approach. Elsevier,
2011.
11


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Samuel Holt, Alihan Hüyük, Zhaozhi Qian, Hao Sun, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Neural laplace
control for continuous-time delayed systems. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics, pp. 1747–1778. PMLR, 2023.
Samuel Holt, Alihan Hüyük, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Active observing in continuous-time
control. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao
Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng
Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta programming for multi-agent
collaborative framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VtmBAGCN7o.
Chenxu Hu, Jie Fu, Chenzhuang Du, Simian Luo, Junbo Zhao, and Hang Zhao. Chatdb: Augmenting
llms with databases as their symbolic memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03901, 2023.
Inflection AI. Inflection-2, 2023. URL https://inflection.ai/inflection-2.
Peter Justin. Flaskbb. https://github.com/flaskbb/flaskbb, 2023.
Kwanwoo Lee, Kyo C Kang, and Jaejoon Lee. Concepts and guidelines of feature modeling for
product line software engineering. In International Conference on Software Reuse, pp. 62–77.
Springer, 2002.
Guohao Li, Hasan Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. Camel: Com-
municative agents for" mind" exploration of large language model society. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Wenda Li, Lei Yu, Yuhuai Wu, and Lawrence C. Paulson. Isarstep: a benchmark for high-level
mathematical reasoning, 2021.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
Xinnian Liang, Bing Wang, Hui Huang, Shuangzhi Wu, Peihao Wu, Lu Lu, Zejun Ma, and Zhoujun
Li. Unleashing infinite-length input capacity for large-scale language models with self-controlled
memory system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13343, 2023.
Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni,
and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.03172, 2023a.
Ruibo Liu, Ruixin Yang, Chenyan Jia, Ge Zhang, Denny Zhou, Andrew M Dai, Diyi Yang, and
Soroush Vosoughi. Training socially aligned language models in simulated human society. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.16960, 2023b.
Vadim Liventsev, Anastasiia Grishina, Aki Härmä, and Leon Moonen. Fully autonomous program-
ming with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10423, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023.
Donne Martin. System design primer. https://github.com/donnemartin/system-d
esign-primer, 2023.
Joan C Miller and Clifford J Maloney. Systematic mistake analysis of digital computer programs.
Communications of the ACM, 6(2):58–63, 1963.
Ali Modarressi, Ayyoob Imani, Mohsen Fayyaz, and Hinrich Schütze. Ret-llm: Towards a general
read-write memory for large language models, 2023.
12


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Niklas Muennighoff, Qian Liu, Armel Zebaze, Qinkai Zheng, Binyuan Hui, Terry Yue Zhuo, Swayam
Singh, Xiangru Tang, Leandro Von Werra, and Shayne Longpre. Octopack: Instruction tuning
code large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07124, 2023.
Yohei Nakajima. Babyagi. https://github.com/yoheinakajima/babyagi, 2023.
Michael Nicolaidis. Soft errors in modern electronic systems, volume 41. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2010.
Brian Okken. Python Testing with pytest. Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Anton Osika. Gpt-engineer. https://github.com/AntonOsika/gpt-engineer, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
27730–27744, 2022.
Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph E Gonzalez.
Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.
Hao Peng, Nikolaos Pappas, Dani Yogatama, Roy Schwartz, Noah A. Smith, and Lingpeng Kong.
Random feature attention, 2021.
Jason Phang, Yao Zhao, and Peter J. Liu. Investigating efficiently extending transformers for long
input summarization, 2022.
Ofir Press, Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables
input length extrapolation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Toran Bruce Richards. Autogpt. https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/Auto
-GPT, 2023.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Megan Kinniment Lucas Jun Koba Sato, Haoxing Du, Brian Goodrich, Max Hasin, Lawrence Chan,
Luke Harold Miles, Tao R Lin, Hjalmar Wijk, Joel Burget, Aaron Ho, et al. Evaluating language-
model agents on realistic autonomous tasks. https://evals.alignment.org/Evalua
ting_LMAs_Realistic_Tasks.pdf, 2023.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
use tools, 2023.
Dale Schuurmans. Memory augmented large language models are computationally universal. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.04589, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Asim Shrestha and Adam Watkins. Agentgpt. https://github.com/reworkd/AgentGPT,
2023.
13


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Chris Tabor. Flask jsondash. https://github.com/christabor/flask_jsondash,
2023.
Leandros Tassiulas and Anthony Ephremides. Stability properties of constrained queueing systems
and scheduling policies for maximum throughput in multihop radio networks. In 29th IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 2130–2132. IEEE, 1990.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, and Donald Metzler. Efficient transformers: A survey, 2022.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu
Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable
multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Sylvain Thénault. Pylint, 2023. URL https://pylint.readthedocs.io/en/stable/.
Available at: http://pylint.pycqa.org/.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Alan Mathison Turing et al. On computable numbers, with an application to the entscheidungsproblem.
J. of Math, 58(345-363):5, 1936.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 30, 2017.
John Von Neumann. First draft of a report on the edvac, 30 june 1945. Moore School of Electrical
Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Available online: https://library.
si. edu/digital-library/book/firstdraftofrepo00vonn (accessed on 1 October 2022), 1945.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432, 2023a.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6):1–26, 2024.
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z. Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
with linear complexity, 2020.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing
cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-
collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300, 1(2):3, 2023b.
Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul
Christiano. Recursively summarizing books with human feedback, 2021.
Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang Zhu, Beibin Li,
Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via
multi-agent conversation framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155, 2023.
Yuhuai Wu, Markus N. Rabe, DeLesley Hutchins, and Christian Szegedy. Memorizing transformers,
2022.
xai-org. Open release of grok-1, 2024. URL https://x.ai/blog/grok-os.
Alex Xu and Sahn Lam. System Design Interview: An Insider’s Guide, volume 1. Byte Code LLC,
2020.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
2022.
14


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Dani Yogatama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, and Lingpeng Kong. Adaptive semiparametric
language models, 2021.
Manzil Zaheer, Guru Guruganesh, Avinava Dubey, Joshua Ainslie, Chris Alberti, Santiago Ontanon,
Philip Pham, Anirudh Ravula, Qifan Wang, Li Yang, and Amr Ahmed. Big bird: Transformers for
longer sequences, 2021.
Yusen Zhang, Ansong Ni, Ziming Mao, Chen Henry Wu, Chenguang Zhu, Budhaditya Deb, Ahmed
Awadallah, Dragomir Radev, and Rui Zhang. Summn: A multi-stage summarization framework for
long input dialogues and documents. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1592–1604, Dublin, Ireland, May
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.112. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.112.
Zexuan Zhong, Tao Lei, and Danqi Chen. Training language models with memory augmentation. In
Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
5657–5673, 2022.
Mingchen Zhuge, Haozhe Liu, Francesco Faccio, Dylan R Ashley, Róbert Csordás, Anand Gopalakr-
ishnan, Abdullah Hamdi, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Vincent Herrmann, Kazuki Irie, et al.
Mindstorms in natural language-based societies of mind. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17066, 2023.
15


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Appendix
Table of Contents
A Stored-Program Computers (SPC)
17
A.1
SPC is a Universal Turing Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
A.2 What is an Automatic Computer? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
B
Control Unit Operation
18
C Code-L2MAC High Level Implementation Details
19
C.1
Read / Write Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
D Extended Related Work
22
D.1 Vanilla LLMs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D.2 Transformers for Long Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D.3
Memory Augmented LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
D.4 Tool Augmented LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
D.5
Multi-step Reasoning & Reflecting LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
D.6 Turing Machines, Stored Program Computers and Machine Learning
. . . . . .
25
E
Benchmark Task Environment Details
25
E.1
Codebase Generation System Design Task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
E.2
HumanEval Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
F
Benchmark Method Implementation Details
30
F.1
Code-L2MAC Low Level Implementation Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
G Evaluation Metrics
34
G.1
Motivation for Feature %
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
H Additional Results
40
H.1
HumanEval Benchmark Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
H.2
L2MAC for Writing an Entire Book . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
H.3 Additional Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
H.4
Code L2MAC in Action.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
H.5 Additional Diverse Programming Code Generation Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
H.6
Human Expert Validation of Features Implemented Percentage Metric . . . . . .
56
H.7
Challenges and the Evaluation of Human-written Test-cases . . . . . . . . . . .
56
H.8
Generating 1,000+ Lines of Code with Code-L2MAC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
H.9
Code-L2MAC Ablation with No Instruction Summarization Message
. . . . . .
57
H.10 Additional Tasks on Implementing a New Feature in an Existing Large Code Base
with Code-L2MAC of up to 165,000 LOCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
I
Future work
59
I.1
L2MAC in Non-coding Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Code. All code is available at https://github.com/samholt/L2MAC. We have a
broader research group codebase at https://github.com/vanderschaarlab/L2M
AC.
16


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
A
STORED-PROGRAM COMPUTERS (SPC)
Stored-Program Computer (SPC). Originally termed the von Neumann architecture, was first
proposed by Von Neumann (1945) as a combination of a processor (arithmetic and logic unit),
a Control Unit (CU), and memory capable of storing both instructions and data, SPCs set the
foundation for modern computer design. With a control unit (CU) managing the interaction between
both components, this design is capable of being reprogrammed to solve various tasks without manual
intervention 9. In more detail, the CU uses instructions from the memory to set the processor to
a specific state (e.g., load two numbers into the processor’s (arithmetic logic unit) input registers
and then execute addition and store the result in memory. The computer is not only able to perform
arithmetic and logic operations, but it can also manipulate the memory. One unique aspect often
overlooked in this paradigm that is crucial to the reliable operation of the processor is error-checking
of the processor’s outputs. Errors can arise in a typical processor from hardware influences such
as temperature, voltage variations, or radiation (e.g., cosmic rays) (Nicolaidis, 2010), or from miss-
specified inputs leading to overflows (e.g., divide by zero errors). Therefore, typical processors involve
output checks, the simplest being parity bit checks, and can combine these with error-correcting
mechanisms (Harris & Harris, 2010).
A.1
SPC IS A UNIVERSAL TURING MACHINE
Stored-program computer (SPC) and Automata Theory. We can consider an SPC as a specific type
of Turing machine T. Formally, a Turing machine is defined by the 7-tuple T = (Q, Σ, Γ, δ, q0, b, F),
where:
• Q is a finite set of states.
• Σ is the finite input alphabet not containing the special blank symbol b.
• Γ is the finite tape alphabet, where b ∈Γ and Σ ⊆Γ.
• δ : Q × Γ →Q × Γ × {L, R} is the transition function. Given a state and a tape symbol,
it specifies the next state, the symbol to write on the tape, and the direction in which the
machine should move its head (Left or Right).
• q0 ∈Q is the start state.
• F ⊆Q is the set of accepting states.
In the context of a stored-program computer, the memory holds both the instructions (akin to the
transition function δ) and the data (akin to the input sequence from Σ). The program counter, which
determines the next instruction to execute, can be represented by the machine’s current state in
Q. The execution of a program on an SPC is then analogous to the computation performed by a
Turing machine when transitioning from one state to another based on the input read and the defined
transition function δ.
The universality of an SPC, similar to a universal Turing machine, means that given the appropriate
transition function (or set of program instructions) in its memory, it can simulate any other Turing
machine and perform any computable task (Turing et al., 1936).
A.2
WHAT IS AN AUTOMATIC COMPUTER?
The term ‘automatic computer,’ as used in this paper, comes from the original conception presented
by Turing et al. (1936), where Turing introduced the concept of an automatic-machine—commonly
known today as a Turing machine. In this context, ‘automatic’ refers to a system capable of executing
a pre-defined set of instructions without human intervention (Turing et al., 1936; Von Neumann,
1945).
9As a side note, the Church-Turing Thesis posits that both Universal Turing Machines (UTMs) and SPCs
are capable of simulating each other and, therefore, are models of the same class of computational processes
Von Neumann (1945) (Appendix A.1). Recently, it has been shown that augmenting an LLM with external
read-and-write memory allows it to simulate a UTM (Schuurmans, 2023). However, we do not aim to reproduce
the capabilities of the current CPU-SPC in arithmetic and logic operations but instead explore the powerful
abilities of LLM-SPCs as automatic computers.
17


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
In the context of LLMs, there are methods whereby LLMs can autonomously execute tasks, as
reviewed by Wang et al. (2023a). However, it is crucial to differentiate between the concepts of
‘autonomous’ and ‘automatic’. Autonomous agents are characterized by their ability to independently
devise and adapt plans, implying a level of self-determination and initiative in executing instructions.
In contrast, our focus with L2MAC is on developing a system that meticulously and automatically
executes pre-defined instructions contained in the prompt program I. This execution requires no
human intervention during the process until all instructions have been successfully executed. In this
regard, L2MAC aligns more with the traditional concept of an automatic computer. It functions
as a general-purpose, instruction-following LLM-based computer (Von Neumann, 1945) dedicated
to efficiently executing the provided instructions, thereby ensuring adherence to the completion of
the originally specified prompt program. The term ‘general-purpose’ here implies that L2MAC can
accommodate any prompt program as input and execute it without necessitating system redesign for
each new prompt-program introduced.
B
CONTROL UNIT OPERATION
The Control Unit, manages the entire context of the LLM and is itself a finite state machine. Here we
expand on Section 3.3, provide pseudocode in Algorithm 1, provide an extend block-diagram figure
of L2MAC in Figure 5, and a data flow diagram in Figure 6.
Please execute the coding task.
2. Implement user registration with sign-up and
password recovery endpoints; ensure both work
through unit tests.
Condition new code on existing ﬁles: [’app.py’,
’database.py’, ’test_database.py’]. View ﬁles as
needed. Previously, the app’s basic structure
with a mock database was set up and tested
successfully.
[Function Call] [‘view_ﬁles‘] "app.py",
"database.py", "test_database.py"
[Function response] Code (Contents of "app.py",
"database.py", "test_database.py")
Has step task been completed? ...
[Function call ‘write_ﬁles‘] Code (overwrites
ﬁle "database.py" containing a mock database
class with methods to manage users, messages,
groups, and statuses. It also adds additional
unit tests in "test_database.py")
￿
Failed 2 tests, Passed 7. (details)
Has step task been completed? ...
[Function call ‘write_ﬁles‘] Code (overwrites
ﬁle "database.py" ﬁxing the original user regis-
tration functionality which it broke.)
￿
Syntactic valid code and all unit tests pass.
Has step task been completed?
[Function Call] [‘sub_step_complete‘]
Please execute the coding task.
9. Set up ofﬂine messaging. Make a list to
hold messages when ofﬂine. Each message
in the list has details of sender, receiver, and
content. Create a way for users to update their
online status. Ensure everything works by writ-
ing tests...
Please execute the coding task.
1. Set up the application’s structure, including a
mock database, and implement user registration
and proﬁle management...
[Function call ‘write_ﬁles‘] Code (creates a
Flask application in "app.py", sets up a mock
database in "database.py", and establishes corre-
sponding tests in "test_database.py".)
￿
Syntactic valid code and all unit tests pass.
Has the step task been completed? If yes, call
the function ‘sub_step_complete‘; otherwise,
reﬂect and correct the full code to complete the
task.
[Function Call] [‘sub_step_complete‘]
Please summarize the output of this step.
The core of the application and a mock in-
memory database are established in app.py,
with all tests successful.
Please code an online chat platform with:
• Sign-up & Password recovery.
• Proﬁle pictures & status.
• Privacy settings.
• Block contacts & Group management.
• Real-time messaging & Receipts.
• End-to-end Encryption & Image sharing.
• Emojis & Stickers.
• Group chat creation.
• Admin roles.
• Temporary image statuses & Visibility control.
• Web version.
• Ofﬂine messaging & Online status.
1. Set up the application’s structure, including a
mock database, and implement user registration
and proﬁle management...
2. Establish contact and message management,
including group chats, encryption, and image
sharing functionalities...
3. Introduce a web application interface, imple-
ment an ofﬂine mode, and ﬁnalize with compre-
hensive testing and debugging...
...
...
...
...
[Function Call] [‘sub_step_complete‘]
Instruction 1.
File Store
Instruction 2.
File Store
Instruction 9.
File Store
...
User
LLM
CU
CU
CU
LLM
LLM
LLM
...
Context Window Ct
Write
Read
Write
Read
Write
D
D
D
Requirements
Write
Figure 5: Code-L2MAC Extended Overview. Code-L2MAC is an instantiation of the LLM
automatic computer (L2MAC) framework, here for extensive code generation. First, it breaks down
the user task into sequential instructions I. The Control Unit (CU) manages the LLM’s context
window Ct for each instruction and interacts with the external memory file store D through read,
write, and evaluate tools. It identifies and reads relevant files from the memory to generate or update
files per instruction (P2). This ensures proper conditioning of existing files without losing vital
context (P1). Automatic checks evaluate the LLM’s outputs for correctness and completion (P3),
with iterative error corrections involving both code syntactical checks of the code and running self-
generated unit tests to check desired functionality. Overall, this produces a complete large codebase
that fulfills the detailed user task in the file store D.
18


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
File Store
Control Unit
CU
LLM
Function: 
Read/Write/
Evaluate
Context Window 
Mc
Mu
Mr
Mf
Mr
Mc
Mr
CU
LLM
LLM
CU
Fetch next instruction 
•
Instructions
•
Files
I
I(k)
D
Ct
Figure 6: Data flow of L2MAC executing one prompt instruction I(k) from a self-programmed
prompt-program I. The first practical LLM-based stored-program automatic computer (L2MAC)
framework. The L2MAC consists of a file store D, an entire memory write component W, an entire
memory read component R, and a program control flow mechanism that of a Control Unit CU (c.f.,
Figure 2) to manage the LLM’s context window—encompassing both its inputs and outputs. Here,
the context window Ct (dashed gray box) consists of a sequence of messages, where each message
has one of the following message types: control Mc, user Mu, LLM response Mr and function
response Mf.
C
CODE-L2MAC HIGH LEVEL IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
In the following we describe the high-level implementation details of Code-L2MAC, and we provide
the verbose low level implementation details, such as the function JSON definitions in Appendix F.1.
We follow the same structure as the L2MAC outline and focus on the specific design choices we made
for each item. For the LLM Processor, we use GPT-4-0613 OpenAI (2023), which trains GPT-4 to
receive in-context descriptions of functions (tools) and call them as needed, where the descriptions
follow a JSON format (OpenAI, 2023).
The functions we provide are the following:
1. ‘provide_detailed_sub_task_steps_for_sub_agents‘. For producing a step-by-step plan,
where each step paragraph is a detailed sub-task step for a separate sub-agent LLM to
complete.
2. ‘sub_task_step_complete‘. For the LLM to call when the user specified sub task step has
been completed.
3. ‘view_files‘. Prints out all the file contents into the response to view.
4. ‘run_python_file‘. Runs a python file and returns the output to the response to view.
5. ‘write_files‘. Writes out multiple files that will be combined into the existing codebase.
6. ‘delete_files‘. Deletes files, where their names are specified.
Next, we discuss specific choices to develop a method based on our LLM Automatic Computer
(L2MAC) framework specifically designed for large code generation tasks, which we call Code-
L2MAC.
For the LLM Processor, we use GPT-4-0613 OpenAI (2023), which trains GPT-4 to receive in-
context descriptions of functions and call them as needed following a JSON format (OpenAI, 2023).
See Appendix F.1 for a low-level JSON definition of the functions that we provide to the LLM, most
of which we also mention below.
In terms of the instructions, we initialize it10 with I0 = ∅, and the CU queries the LLM only in the
first iteration with the user-specified feature requirements (task description) and requests the LLM to
define a sequential prompt program I = [I(0), . . . , I(K)].
Regarding the data D, we determine that it encompasses only the code generated so far so that upon
termination of Code-L2MAC, D corresponds to its output. However, we impose the codebase D to
10Rigorously, I is initialized with a set of pre-defined messages for the LLM to be effective as part of
Code-LLM (including the functions the CU provides to the LLM).
19


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Algorithm 1 Control Unit Pseudocode for L2MAC
1: Input: Initial user input prompt pin; file store D; Domain Evaluator unit E; Domain system
message Ms; Domain bootstrap message Mcb; Context window constraint c; Unwind token
marign b
2: Output: External memory store D.
3: I ←∅, Mrs ←∅
4: Mu ←pin
5: Mr ←LLM({Ms, Mcb, pin})
▷Self-program I, by bootstrap instruction
6: (I, D) ←process_into_prompt_program(Mr, D)
7: while I is not empty do
8:
Ct ←{Ms, Mrs}
▷Clear Context Window: It always contains the system and
summary message
9:
(I(k), D) ←pop_front_of_I(I, D)
▷Fetch: next instruction from external memory D
10:
Ct ←Ct ⊕I(k)
11:
has_instruction_completed ←False
12:
while has_instruction_completed is False do
13:
Mr ←PLLM(Ct)
14:
∆Ct+1 ←{Mr}
15:
if ‘function_call’ in Mr then
16:
(Mf, D) ←execute_function(Mr, D)
17:
▷Invoke tool: Includes functions (tools) to read/write and evaluate the file store D
18:
∆Ct+1 ←∆Ct+1 ⊕Mf
19:
if ‘step_completed’ in Mr then
20:
Mfe ←E(D)
▷Run evaluator module on file store
21:
if Mfe is ∅then
▷If evaluator checks pass
22:
while |Ct ⊕∆C(t+1)| > b do
▷Summarize instruction output to
Mrs. Unwind oldest messages to make room for summary control message Mcs and summary
response Mrs
23:
(_, Ct) ←pop_back_of_Ct(Ct)
24:
Mrs ←PLLM(Ct ⊕∆C(t+1) ⊕Mcs)
25:
has_instruction_completed ←True
26:
∆Ct+1 ←∆Ct+1 ⊕Mfe
27:
∆Ct+1 ←∆Ct+1 ⊕Mcc
▷Append the cycle message
28:
if |Ct ⊕∆C(t+1)| > c then
▷Would exceed context check
29:
while |Ct ⊕∆C(t+1)| > b do
▷Summarize progress to Mrs. Unwind oldest
messages to make room for summary control message Mcs and summary response Mrs
30:
(_, Ct) ←pop_back_of_Ct(Ct)
31:
Mrs ←PLLM(Ct ⊕∆C(t+1) ⊕Mcs)
32:
Ct+1 ←{Ms, Mrs, I(k)}
33:
else
34:
Ct+1 ←Ct ⊕∆Ct+1
▷Append Messages
35: return D
be partitioned into files no longer than the context window11, and we name the files with a path from
a root directory/where the name of folders and files suggests its content. This choice is not only
useful for a human reader but will be crucial for our Read-and-Write implementations.
The remaining details are in the arguably richest component of the method, the control unit.
Execution flow of the LLM. In Code-L2MAC, we can describe the execution flow as the following
iteration. For each instruction I(k) ∈I, while I(k) is not satisfied, do the following—following the
CU pseudocode Algorithm 1. First, load the fixed messages that provide in-context learning to the
LLM, the description of the current instruction I(k), and the summary of the last execution Mrs. We
11More precisely, no longer than half the margin left in the context after the initial messages are provided
in any iteration in the execution. This is to ensure that the LLM can read and rewrite any given file inside its
context.
20


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
let the LLM iterate (work on completing the instruction) while in context, and if approaching out of
context, summarize its current context and iterate.
Interfacing with tools. During execution, the LLM might request reading and writing operations.
After each write (which possibly introduces a new test), a syntactical checker and all existing tests in
D are run, and the output is provided to the LLM—through Mfe. If, after receiving this feedback,
the LLM considers the task completed, it can signal it to the CU through calling a special function
‘step_complete‘, which summarizes the current context output into Mrs and continues executing the
next instruction with this summary Mrs. After all K instructions are completed, the process halts
(stops), and D is returned.
We are only left to detail the process of reading and writing. Given the instruction I(k), the LLM
must be able to know what modules in D it can call, how to call them, and where in the directory to
write new code. However, the size of D might exceed the context window.
Due to the restrictions mentioned on the files in D, the LLM can read and write any single full file as
desired and, if necessary for context preservation, summarize this information for the next iteration.
However, the decision regarding which files are read can be heuristically based on the semantic
information provided by the path and name of the file, which encodes its role in D.
Specifically, we enable the read component R of Code-L2MAC by implementing the two functions.
list_files(), which lists the file paths in breadth-first search order. This could be refined to only
list a subset of files within a subdirectory, but for simplicity, in our implementation, we automatically
list all file paths in D for the LLM as contexts to enable it to be aware of existing code and help it
determine where to include newly generated files. And view_files(files), which takes a list
of file paths and returns strings with their content—appending this to the context window.
We also provide the LLM at all times with a system message Ms to inform it that it is to complete a
coding task, that it must act without human input, and a few details about the coding environment
that exists within—for example, that it can use the python test framework Pytest, and can only mock
in-memory databases as none are installed in the local environment. Although this could be resolved
by installing and providing a clean, fresh version for most common database providers, we leave this
extension as a future work to explore.
We also provide the LLM with a pre-prompt message that it uses with the user-specified requirements,
to construct the initial plan, we also detail this and the system message in Appendix F.1.
C.1
READ / WRITE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Here we expand on the read/write implementation details of Code-L2MAC. This builds on the
existing descriptions contained within Section 4 and appendices C and F.1.
The LLM interfaces with the control unit (CU) through calling functions, and thus, the read and write
implementation can be fully described through a discussion of the functions that are provided to
Code-L2MAC to that end, which are ‘read_files’ and ‘write_files’.
It is worth noting the control unit always exposes the LLM to the list of file paths that are already
part of the codebase (e.g., “file paths: [‘app.py’, ‘tests/test_app.py’]”). The name of directories and
files (i.e. file path) provides a semantical prior for the order in which the LLM will read each file,
depending on the functionality it is looking for (among other elements, including always the current
instruction It, and possibly previous dialog turn outputs and error responses).
Note that if the LLM initially reads a file that does not contain what it was looking for or the desired
functionality is spread across multiple files, the LLM can continue reading other files. Recall that
when the context window is full, the CU prompts the LLM to summarize the relevant parts of the
context window for the current instruction It. In this case, it could summarize which are the relevant
files it needs to read if the functionality is spread across multiple files.
Assume the LLM has already determined the name of the file ‘file_path’ that it wants to read. Let us
zoom into the functions (tools) provided to the LLM to signal intentions to the CU.
• ‘read_files(file_path)’ requests the CU to output into the context window Ct the contents of
‘file_path’.
21


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
• ‘write_files(file_path, content)’ requests the CU to create or overwrite ‘file_path’ and popu-
late it with ‘content’.
As the empirical results demonstrate, these functions perform well as components of Code-L2MAC.
The future work appendix (Appendix I) discusses how these functions could be optimized.
We find Code-L2MAC’s reading and writing functionality different from previous memory-augmented
LLM (where we refer to the extended related work for more details, Appendix D) as these can be
categorized as:
• Append only memory: These methods explicitly extend the implicit knowledge of LLMs
through an external corpus (Zhong et al., 2022) to facilitate long conversational or document
summarization tasks (Liang et al., 2023).
• Key-value memory: These methods interface the LLM with a dictionary or a database (Hu
et al., 2023), which does not apply to our automatic coding tasks.
D
EXTENDED RELATED WORK
D.1
VANILLA LLMS
The usage of only a single LLM without a memory augmentation approach is limited to only
producing an output that can be maximally as long as the underlying LLM’s context window
constraint c. Although not directly applicable, they are still related since the main focus of all coding
tasks to date in the literature focuses on using an LLM to solve a code generation task within the
context window constraint c. Notable examples include Codex (Chen et al., 2021), GPT4 (OpenAI,
2023), GPT-Engineer (Osika, 2023) and Code LLama (Rozière et al., 2023).
Vanilla LLMs with longer context windows. One might try to directly extend the context win-
dow. However, such an approach scales quadratically in computational complexity (Vaswani et al.,
2017), an impracticality worsened by the observation that LLMs with long context windows attend
information from the middle of the window poorly, substantially decreasing their task performance
as the length increases (Liu et al., 2023a). Another naive approach would be to fine-tune the LLM
in the environment at hand so that it implicitly memorizes it in its weights, but this should be done
recurrently as the state evolves, which is also too computationally expensive to be practical (Brown
et al., 2020).
D.2
TRANSFORMERS FOR LONG INPUTS
There are architectural approaches to directly allow LLMs to ingest larger windows. Tay et al. (2022)
offers a comprehensive review on this topic of “efficiency-flavored” transformers.
Child et al. (2019); Beltagy et al. (2020); Zaheer et al. (2021) present sparse attention mechanisms
that scale subquadratically with the length of the sequence, Guo et al. (2022); Phang et al. (2022)
draw on local/global attention mechanisms to scale to longer inputs, Wang et al. (2020) approximate
the attention mechanism with a low-rank matrix to achieve linear complexity, Choromanski et al.
(2022) provide an unbiased estimator of the attention that converges uniformly, Peng et al. (2021) use
random features to approximate soft-max attention with a decreased computational burden. Although
this list is not exhaustive, the precise impact of these optimizations on the performance of LLM is not
yet fully understood, and the adoption of these approaches in practice is not widespread.
In Press et al. (2022), the authors discuss biasing attention scores with a penalty proportional to
their distance instead of using positional embeddings, which allows them to extrapolate to longer
sequences in inference time effectively. Consequently, they achieve significantly more efficient
training. However, this does not address the challenges of long context windows at inference time.
22


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
D.3
MEMORY AUGMENTED LLMS
D.3.1
LLMS WITH BUILT-IN MEMORY
These are works that expose the LLM to memory at training time. Yogatama et al. (2021) extend the
usual attention architecture in two ways. First, they extend the context window without much burden
at training time by omitting the backward step for distant tokens. Second, they update the next token
probability distribution by incorporating information about the next token for historical data for the
nearest neighbors in latent space. Borgeaud et al. (2022) essentially incorporates for each training
example the k-NN (based on an embedding fixed through training) from an external corpus. Zhong
et al. (2022) propose a boost to the next token probability distribution based on the similarity of the
current embedding to the previous embeddings where this token appeared. These enable the LLM
to be trained with this memory component but can essentially be thought of in the same spirit as
embedding NN lookup memory. However, none of these methods enables the memory to be updated.
Finally, (Bulatov et al., 2022) embeds into a sequence of tokens memory for the next inference. This
approach, however, has a low-interpretable, non-symbolic, and limited memory, thereby not fully
addressing arbitrarily long tasks.
D.3.2
INFERENCE-TIME MEMORY-AUGMENTED LLMS
The plainness of the limitations imposed by a limited context window has motivated several efforts
to overcome it, which has inevitably led to the concept of memory. However, most of such works
focus on long conversational / text summarization tasks (Liang et al., 2023; Modarressi et al., 2023;
Zhong et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2023), or mathematical/database reasoning (Hu et al., 2023). The
methods from the first group, due to the domain, focus exclusively on the read component of memory.
The same happens with (Wu et al., 2022), which explores the k-NN lookup to retrieve memory
for next-token predictions and observes improvements in perplexity for multiple tasks, including
coding. However, such read-only implementations are more sensitive to the erratic fallibility and the
“stochastic” nature of LLMs to break code and cannot interact with memory in any other way. An
exception to this is Modarressi et al., 2023, but its memory (and thus update capabilities) is composed
of tuples of the form (Subject 1, Subject 2, Relationship), for which there is no apparent application to
coding tasks. Similarly, mathematical / database reasoning methods such as (Hu et al., 2023) reduce
memory to a dictionary of values or a structured database, which again are not applicable to different
settings (e.g., coding).
D.3.3
AUTNOMOUS AGENT LLMS WITH MEMORY
These works formulate the LLM as an agent in a reinforcement learning environment, where it
observes a state and then takes an action, often calling a particular tool with an argument and
interacting with the environment until the task is solved (Wang et al., 2023a). Unique to these works
is they act fully autonomously, where they are often given a few high-level goals and construct
their own plans, which are continuously updated to have self-guided operation without external
input, to complete their goals or run continuously (Richards, 2023; Shrestha & Watkins, 2023;
Nakajima, 2023). Regarding code generation tasks, this implies that these agents can re-program and
re-formulate their step plan at run-time; however, this can often lead to the agents going off-topic
instead of completing the specified given task and getting stuck in infinite loops (Wang et al., 2023a;
Sato et al., 2023). However, in L2MAC we specify that it is automatic rather than fully autonomous
so that the specified user input commands can be performed without manual intervention whilst
achieving the input specified given task by the user. Furthermore, of the existing Autonomous
Agent LLMs with memory, the only directly applicable method capable of writing, reading, and
executing code of files is AutoGPT (Richards, 2023). This overcomes the context window constraint
to complete long-running tasks iteratively lossly summarizing the previous actions completed after
a given number of turns and only keeping the running summary in the context window. Prevalent
with AutoGPT and others is that they contain a first step of taking the user-specified task, and lossly
summarizing it into a name, role, and five one-sentence goals for the agent to complete; this goal
message also is always in the agent’s context window. At each dialog step, the LLM is prompted with
a ReACT (Yao et al., 2022) message template to reason, plan, and act by selecting the next tool to call
until the goals have been achieved, then stops. Overall, these methods, such as AutoGPT have two
key limitations: (1) they lossily compress the initial detailed user-specified task into a six-sentence
23


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
description (a sentence role and five goal sentences), and (2) they lossily compress the previous action
history, which for code generation tasks equates to forgetting which files were created and their use,
which is further compounded by re-planning with a separate new plan at dialog step. Whereas our
proposed LLM automatic computer (L2MAC) can (1) create a detailed plan initially and use that
single plan throughout to align to complete the original user-specified task, and (2) L2MAC is aware
of the existing files generated, which encapsulates all the previous actions up to the current state
(where the files track the current memory state), allowing it to know and integrate new code with the
existing files already generated.
D.4
TOOL AUGMENTED LLMS
Schick et al. (2023) teach LLMs to use external tools through API calls, for example, to use a
calculator, a search engine, or a translation system to cover LLM weaknesses or reduce computation
cost. The methods by which the LLM chooses when to read from memory (instead of automatically
receiving the information obtained from memory) can basically be regarded as providing a new
tool to the LLM (e.g., Hu et al. (2023); Modarressi et al. (2023)). This is the case for the L2MAC
implementation of reading and writing, but not all the functionalities of the control unit can be seen
under this lens, as is the case with the monitoring of the context window or the automatic evaluation
of the file store, unless we stretch it excessively. In any case, as argued in Modarressi et al. (2023),
this similarity with Schick et al. (2023) does not undermine the relevance of the development of new
and influential tools.
D.5
MULTI-STEP REASONING & REFLECTING LLMS
Reflecting LLMs. These methods can improve the task performance of existing single LLMs by
having access to an evaluator and using the LLM to reflect on the actions taken (current trajectory
part) to derive actionable verbal feedback that is persisted in an append-only memory (Shinn et al.,
2023; Madaan et al., 2023). These verbal reflection learnings are a form of in-context learning (Dong
et al., 2022) that are then used to improve the task or sub-task performance when the task or sub-task
is restarted anew. This simple, and practical reflection idea, when having access to a possible external
validator, such as self-generated unit tests for code generation, have demonstrated improving single
LLMs for small code snippet generation tasks performance to be state-of-the-art (Shinn et al., 2023).
A unique characteristic our our checks is that they are not only aimed at validating the immediate
output but rather to impose coherence on the memory as a whole. This implies that while in previous
settings, a failing test would require a change in the LLM output, in L2MAC, it can also motivate
revisiting and refactoring a preexisting component in the file store.
Specifically, we find the following differences between Code-L2MAC and reflecting LLM methods,
such as Self-Refine and Reflexion to be:
• Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023) refines the most recent output from the LLM and Reflexion
(Shinn et al., 2023) the recent outputs that are only within the LLM’s current context window
Ct; whereas Code-L2MAC can refine the entire file store, encompassing all previous outputs
from the LLM—allowing it to fix or improve earlier outputs from multiple instructions
back, outside its context window, which are now erroring due to a new code implementation
change. This enables Code-L2MAC to generate long, consistent, and interrelated code
structures.
• Self-Refine and Reflexion are constrained to operating on an output within the context
window constraint c, whereas Code-L2MAC can manage a total output greater than the
context window constraint through the L2MAC framework.
Multi-step reasoning. Methods that leverage a hierarchical flow of information between LLMs can
also handle information that does not fit the context length, thanks to the distribution of information.
For example, (Zhang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2021) iteratively and hierarchically perform the sum-
marization of long documents. We refer to (Dohan et al., 2022) for the unification of such methods
under a common formalism. Code-L2MAC uses simple instantiations of this family to populate
I from the initial prompt or to summarize the execution when cleaning the context window, but
future iterations could build on more complex cascades to improve our implementation of L2MAC.
Multistep reasoning is only a small part of L2MAC, and we envision L2MAC enhancing multistep
24


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
reasoning methods through the CU and memory (c.f. Appendix I). Furthermore, there exist standard
RL multi-step planning frameworks (Holt et al., 2024; 2023) which could be adapted to LLMs in
future works.
D.5.1
LLM-BASED MULTI-AGENT SYSTEMS
LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems, comprise of multiple LLM-powered agents that interact with one
another to achieve a desired task (Wang et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024). L2MAC is an example of an
LLM-based multi-agent system, as it consists of separate LLM-based agents that work sequentially
each getting a separate next instruction (where the instructions were generated by an initial LLM-
agent) and persisting memory of the previous agent’s outputs between the agent’s, as illustrated in
Figure 1. Broadly LLM-based multi-agent systems, facilitate sophisticated interactions and decision-
making (Wang et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024), proposed through collective intelligence and specialized
profiles and skills of multiple agents, to allow them to collaboratively complete tasks. Such works
include (Wang et al., 2023b; Du et al., 2023; Zhuge et al., 2023; Hao et al., 2023; Akata et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023b; Park et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024;
Packer et al., 2023).
D.6
TURING MACHINES, STORED PROGRAM COMPUTERS AND MACHINE LEARNING
There are instantiations of Universal Turing Machines and Stored-Program Computers with LLMs
(Schuurmans, 2023; Giannou et al., 2023), respectively, which are theoretically insightful. However,
in both cases, their method with a transformer at the core only aims to simulate a UTM or SPC,
thereby not achieving a method functionally superior to either a UTM or SPC (and none of them new),
which can be implemented much more cheaply. In contrast, we capitalize on the SPC framework to
boost the LLM’s unique capabilities as a stochastic NLP to automatically solve potentially long tasks
from a single user prompt, which is altogether a different focus.
Although (Graves et al., 2014) does not use LLMs, and the focus is also completely different to ours
(since it aims to reproduce algorithms by supervised learning), it is worth mentioning that they extend
a Recursive Neural Network with memory to achieve a Turing Machine or von Neumann architecture
capable of inferring simple algorithms when trained to reproduce them.
E
BENCHMARK TASK ENVIRONMENT DETAILS
E.1
CODEBASE GENERATION SYSTEM DESIGN TASK
Given the absence of pre-existing benchmark task environments suitable for evaluating long code
generation tasks, we have introduced a new benchmark tailored for standard system design tasks,
which are typically assigned to humans. Traditional system design tasks often require high-level
conceptualization, such as devising the architecture, modules, components, interfaces, and data
structures needed for an online application to meet specific user feature requirements (Xu & Lam,
2020). Unlike these conventional tasks that predominantly focus on high-level system outlines, our
benchmark mandates the implementation of fully functional code. This code aims to instantiate a
minimal system satisfying the user-specified requirements in a practical manner.
For meaningful and realistic evaluation, our benchmark encompasses three standard system design
codebase generation tasks. The prompt questions for these tasks are derived from actual system
design interview questions, providing a realistic basis for assessment (Xu & Lam, 2020; Martin,
2023). The tasks included in the benchmark are as follows:
1. URL Shortener App: This task necessitates the implementation of a comprehensive online
URL shortening service, a utility that enables users to submit lengthy URLs and subsequently
receive a shortened variant for simplified sharing. The user-specified feature requirements
for this task are extensive. The envisaged system should facilitate URL shortening services,
allowing users to input, validate, and, if desired, customize their URLs. The shortened
URLs should redirect users to the original addresses. Users should have access to analytics,
revealing data such as click counts, timestamps, and geographical locations linked to each
URL. The platform should also support user account creation and management, enabling
25


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
users to edit, delete, or view analytics related to their URLs. An administrative dashboard for
monitoring user activity, user accounts, and overall system performance should be in place.
Furthermore, users should have the ability to set expiration parameters for their shortened
URLs.
2. Online Microblogging App: The task entails the implementation of a web-based microblog-
ging service where registered users can post short textual messages, follow or unfollow
others, and interact with the posts. Each user can create, edit, and manage their profile
with options to set it as private or public. Users can post text messages limited to 280
characters, optionally include images in the posts, and have the ability to delete their posts.
The platform will support interactions with posts, such as liking, retweeting, and replying,
with a nested structure for the comments. Users can also search and filter posts or other
users using keywords, hashtags, mentions, or view trending topics. Furthermore, users can
follow and unfollow others, with a timeline view displaying posts from the users they follow
and receiving notifications for new followers, likes, retweets, replies, and mentions. The
service will also facilitate private messaging between users, with options to block or unblock
users. Finally, the platform will offer user recommendations for following based on interests,
activity, and mutual followers and showcase trending topics, which can be viewed globally
or sorted by location.
3. Online Chat App: This task involves implementing a real-time online chat application.
The GCS must support user registration and authentication functionalities, including email
sign-up and forgotten password recovery. Users should be able to set profile pictures and
status messages, with privacy settings to control visibility. The application should provide
options for contact management (block/unblock contacts and group management), real-time
text messaging with read receipts, end-to-end encryption, image sharing, and support for
emojis, GIFs, and stickers. Group chat functionality should allow the creation of group chats
with assigned names and pictures, participant management, and admin role assignments
and permissions. Users should be able to post image statuses that are visible for a limited
duration, with the ability to control viewer access. The service should be accessible as a web
application and support offline messaging, with queued messages sent upon connectivity
restoration and visible online/offline user statuses.
4. Recipe App: This task focuses on creating a service that allows users to submit, share, and
discover recipes. Key features include the ability for users to submit recipes complete with
ingredients, instructions, and images; options for categorizing recipes by cuisine type or
dietary restrictions; and functionalities for editing or deleting submissions. The platform
also supports searching for recipes based on various criteria such as ingredients or recipe
name, and categorizing recipes by meal type or dietary needs. User account creation and
management are integral, allowing for saving of favorite recipes and displaying user profiles
with their submitted and favorite recipes. Additional features include a rating system where
users can rate recipes on a 5-star scale and write reviews, a community aspect allowing
users to follow others and see updates in a feed, and the sharing of recipes on social media
platforms. An administrative dashboard for managing content, monitoring site usage, and
user engagement is also included, alongside a system for generating recipe recommendations
based on user preferences and past activity.
5. Event Planner App: This task involves developing a web-based application to assist users in
organizing and managing various aspects of event planning. The application enables users to
create and manage events, specifying details like event type, date, time, and customizations
such as themes and color schemes. A calendar view for managing multiple events is included.
Users can search for and book venues through the application, with integration of maps for
venue locations. Guest list management is facilitated with features for creating, importing,
exporting, and RSVP tracking. The platform connects users with event service providers like
caterers and decorators, offering vendor profile viewing, comparison, and in-app messaging
for coordination. Budget management tools allow users to set, track, and receive alerts for
budget overruns. User account features include personal profile creation, customization,
and access to past and upcoming events. Automated notifications and reminders for event
milestones and tasks are part of the system. Reporting and analytics capabilities are provided
for event success metrics, along with feedback collection from guests and vendors post-event.
An administrative dashboard allows for the monitoring and management of user activities,
26


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
system performance, and vendor listings. Additionally, the tool emphasizes security and
data privacy, including secure payment gateway integration.
6. Financial Tracking App: This task involves developing a comprehensive tool for managing
personal finances. It should include functionalities for tracking expenses, incomes, and
investments, as well as setting and adjusting budget goals. Key features include the ability
for users to create and manage a personal account with secure linking of bank accounts
and multi-factor authentication. The application should support both manual and automatic
import of expenses and incomes, categorization of these entries, and visualization of their
history. Budget management is a crucial aspect, with capabilities to set monthly budget
goals, receive alerts when nearing these limits, and analyze spending patterns to suggest
adjustments. The integration with investment accounts to track performance and balance,
along with an overview of asset allocation, is also required. Additionally, the application
should generate financial reports, like monthly summaries, and provide customizable alerts
for unusual spending or important reminders.
Each method receives the same user-specified feature requirements, which are given below for each
environment task, and produces a codebase output, which we then evaluate using our evaluation
methodology, which is fully detailed in Appendix G. The following user-specified input prompts for
each task are:
URL Shortener App, user-specified feature requirements input prompt:
### ** Online URL Shortening
Servic e **
** Overview **:
A s e r v i c e
t h a t
allows
u s e r s
to
submit
long URLs and
then
r e c e i v e
a
s h o r t e n e d
v e r s i o n
of
t h a t URL f o r
ease
of
s h a r i n g .
** F u n c t i o n a l
Requirements
to
implement **:
1.
**URL Shortening **:
−[
]
1 . 1 .
Users
can
i n p u t
a URL to
be
s h o r t e n e d .
−[
]
1 . 2 .
The system
v a l i d a t e s
t h a t
the URL i s
a c t i v e
and
l e g i t i m a t e .
−[
]
1 . 3 .
The system
g e n e r a t e s
a
unique
s h o r t e n e d URL.
−[
]
1 . 4 .
Users
can
choose
custom
s h o r t
l i n k s
( s u b j e c t
to
a v a i l a b i l i t y ) .
2.
** R e d i r e c t i o n **:
−[
]
2 . 1 .
Accessing
the
s h o r t e n e d URL r e d i r e c t s
to
the
o r i g i n a l URL.
3.
** A n a l y t i c s **:
−[
]
3 . 1 .
Users
can view
s t a t i s t i c s
about
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[
]
3 . 2 .
View number
of
c l i c k s .
−[
]
3 . 3 .
View date / time
of
each
c l i c k .
−[
]
3 . 4 .
View
g e o g r a p h i c a l
l o c a t i o n
of
the
c l i c k e r .
4.
** User
Accounts **:
−[
]
4 . 1 .
Users
can
c r e a t e
accounts .
−[
]
4 . 2 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can view
a l l
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[
]
4 . 3 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can
e d i t
or
d e l e t e
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[
]
4 . 4 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can view
a n a l y t i c s
f o r
a l l
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
5.
**Admin Dashboard **:
−[
]
5 . 1 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can view
a l l
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[
]
5 . 2 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can
d e l e t e
any URL or
user
account .
−[
]
5 . 3 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can
monitor
system
performance
and
a n a l y t i c s .
6.
** E x p i r a t i o n **:
−[
]
6 . 1 .
Users
can
s e t
an
e x p i r a t i o n
date / time
f o r
the
s h o r t e n e d URL.
Online Microblogging App, user-specified feature requirements input prompt:
** Online
Microblogging
Servi ce
(OMS) −D e s c r i p t i o n & Requirements **
* D e s c r i p t i o n :*
A web−based
pl a tf o r m
where
r e g i s t e r e d
u s e r s
can
post
s h o r t
text −based
messages ,
view
messages
from
others ,
follow / unfollow
o t h e r
users ,
and
i n t e r a c t
with
p o s t s .
The
p la t fo r m
p ro v id e s
f e a t u r e s
f o r
both
i n d i v i d u a l
u s e r s
and
a d m i n i s t r a t i v e
management .
** F u n c t i o n a l
Requirements
to
implement **:
1.
** User Management :**
1.
** R e g i s t r a t i o n & A u t h e n t i c a t i o n :**
−[
]
Allow
u s e r s
to
r e g i s t e r
using
email ,
username ,
and
password .
−[
]
Option
to
r e s e t
f o r g o t t e n
passwords .
−[
]
Secure
a u t h e n t i c a t i o n
using JWT or
s i m i l a r
p r o t o c o l s .
2.
** P r o f i l e
Management :**
−[
]
Users
can
e d i t
t h e i r
p r o f i l e
i n f o r m a t i o n :
p r o f i l e
p i c t u r e ,
bio ,
website
link ,
and
l o c a t i o n .
−[
]
Option
to make
p r o f i l e
p r i v a t e
or
p u b l i c .
2.
** Posting & Content
Management :**
1.
** C re a ti n g
Posts
( Tweets ) :**
−[
]
Allow
u s e r s
to
c r e a t e
text −based
p o s t s
with
a
l i m i t
of 280
c h a r a c t e r s .
−[
]
Option
to
i n c l u d e
images
in
p o s t s .
−[
]
Users
can
d e l e t e
t h e i r
own p o s t s .
2.
** I n t e r a c t i n g
with
Posts :**
−[
]
Users
can
like ,
retweet ,
and
r e p l y
to
p o s t s .
−[
]
Nested comment
s t r u c t u r e
f o r
post
r e p l i e s .
3.
** Content
F i l t e r i n g & Search :**
−[
]
Users
can
search
f o r
s p e c i f i c
p o s t s
or
u s e r s
using
keywords .
−[
]
F i l t e r
option
based on
hashtags ,
user
mentions ,
or
t r e n d i n g
t o p i c s .
27


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
3.
** S o c i a l
I n t e r a c t i o n :**
1.
** Following & Followers :**
−[
]
Users
can
follow / unfollow
o t h e r
u s e r s .
−[
] A t i m e l i n e
view
d i s p l a y s
p o s t s
from
followed
u s e r s .
−[
]
Users
r e c e i v e
n o t i f i c a t i o n s
f o r new f o l l o w e r s .
2.
** D i r e c t
Messaging :**
−[
]
P r i v a t e
c o n v e r s a t i o n
t h r e a d s
between
u s e r s .
−[
]
Option
to
block / unblock
u s e r s
from
messaging .
3.
** N o t i f i c a t i o n s :**
−[
]
Users
are
n o t i f i e d
of
l i k e s ,
retweets ,
r e p l i e s ,
and
mentions .
4.
** Trending & Discovery :**
1.
** Trending
Topics :**
−[
]
System
i d e n t i f i e s
and
d i s p l a y s
t r e n d i n g
h as h ta g s
or
t o p i c s
based on volume and
v e l o c i t y
of
mentions .
−[
]
Trending
t o p i c s
can be
s o r t e d
based on
l o c a t i o n
or
g l o b a l l y .
2.
** User
Recommendations :**
−[
] Recommend u s e r s
to
follow
based on
i n t e r e s t s ,
a c t i v i t y ,
and
mutual
f o l l o w e r s .
Online Chat App, user-specified feature requirements input prompt:
** Global
Chat
Servic e
(GCS) **
** Overview **:
A re al −time
o n l i n e
chat
a p p l i c a t i o n
allowing
u s e r s
to
send
t e x t
messages ,
images ,
and
c r e a t e
group
c h a t s .
** F u n c t i o n a l
Requirements
to
implement **:
User
R e g i s t r a t i o n
and
A u t h e n t i c a t i o n :
−[
]
1 . 1 .
Sign up
using
email .
−[
]
1 . 2 .
F o r g o t t e n
password
recovery .
User
P r o f i l e :
−[
]
2 . 1 .
Allow
u s e r s
to
s e t
p r o f i l e
p i c t u r e s
and
s t a t u s
messages .
−[
]
2 . 2 .
Privacy
s e t t i n g s
f o r who can
see
user
d e t a i l s
or
l a s t
seen
s t a t u s .
Contact
Management :
−[
]
3 . 1 .
Block / unblock
c o n t a c t s .
−[
]
3 . 2 .
Create ,
edit ,
and manage groups .
Messaging :
−[
]
4 . 1 .
Send and
r e c e i v e
re al −time
t e x t
messages .
−[
]
4 . 2 .
Message
read
r e c e i p t s
( blue
t i c k s
or
e q u i v a l e n t ) .
−[
]
4 . 3 .
End−to −end
e n c r y p t i o n
f o r
s e c u r i t y .
−[
]
4 . 4 .
Image
s h a r i n g .
−[
]
4 . 5 .
Emojis ,
GIFs ,
and
s t i c k e r s
support .
Group Chats :
−[
]
5 . 1 .
Create
group
c h a t s
with
a name and
p i c t u r e .
−[
]
5 . 2 .
Add or
remove
p a r t i c i p a n t s .
−[
]
5 . 3 .
Admin
r o l e s
and
p e r m i s s i o n s .
S t a t u s / Story
Fea ture :
−[
]
6 . 1 .
Allow
u s e r s
to
post
image
s t a t u s e s
v i s i b l e
f o r
a
l i m i t e d
time .
−[
]
6 . 2 .
Control who can
see
the
s t a t u s .
Web A p p l i c a t i o n :
−[
]
7 . 1 . Web−based
v e r s i o n
a c c e s s i b l e
from
browsers .
C o n n e c t i v i t y
and
O f f l i n e Mode :
−[
]
8 . 1 .
Message
queuing
f o r
when the
user
i s
o f f l i n e ;
messages
are
s e n t
once
c o n n e c t i v i t y
i s
r e s t o r e d .
−[
]
8 . 2 .
Display
o n l i n e / o f f l i n e
s t a t u s .
Recipe App, user-specified feature requirements input prompt:
### ** Recipe
Sharing
Platform **
** Overview **:
A s e r v i c e
t h a t
allows
u s e r s
to
submit ,
share ,
and
d i s c o v e r
r e c i p e s .
I t
i n c l u d e s
f e a t u r e s
f o r
c a t e g o r i z i n g
r e c i p e s ,
user
r a t i n g s
and
reviews ,
and
p e r s o n a l
r e c i p e
management .
** F u n c t i o n a l
Requirements
to
implement **:
1.
** Recipe
Submission
and Management **:
−[
]
1 . 1 .
Users
can
submit
r e c i p e s
with
i n g r e d i e n t s ,
i n s t r u c t i o n s ,
and images .
−[
]
1 . 2 .
Recipe
submissions
i n c l u d e
o p t i o n s
f o r
c a t e g o r i z a t i o n
( e . g . ,
c u i s i n e
type ,
d i e t a r y
r e s t r i c t i o n s ) .
−[
]
1 . 3 .
Users
can
e d i t
or
d e l e t e
t h e i r
submitted
r e c i p e s .
−[
]
1 . 4 .
Recipe
format
v a l i d a t i o n
to
ensure
complete
i n f o r m a t i o n .
2.
** Search
and
C a t e g o r i z a t i o n **:
−[
]
2 . 1 .
Users
can
search
f o r
r e c i p e s
based on
i n g r e d i e n t s ,
r e c i p e
name ,
or
c a t e g o r i e s .
−[
]
2 . 2 .
C a t e g o r i z a t i o n
of
r e c i p e s
by
type
( e . g . ,
b r e a k f a s t ,
lunch ,
dinner ) ,
c u i s i n e ,
or
d i e t a r y
needs
( e . g . ,
vegan ,
gluten −f r e e ) .
3.
** User
Accounts
and
P r o f i l e s **:
−[
]
3 . 1 .
Users
can
c r e a t e
and manage
accounts .
−[
]
3 . 2 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can
save
f a v o r i t e
r e c i p e s .
−[
]
3 . 3 .
P r o f i l e
pages
showing
submitted
r e c i p e s
and
f a v o r i t e
r e c i p e s .
4.
** Ratings
and Reviews **:
−[
]
4 . 1 .
Users
can
r a t e
r e c i p e s
on a 5−s t a r
s c a l e .
−[
]
4 . 2 .
Users
can
w r i t e
reviews
f o r
r e c i p e s .
−[
]
4 . 3 .
Display
of
average
r a t i n g
on
r e c i p e
pages .
5.
**Community
F e a t u r e s **:
−[
]
5 . 1 .
Users
can
follow
o t h e r
u s e r s
or
chefs .
−[
]
5 . 2 .
Feed showing
r e c e n t
a c t i v i t y
of
followed
u s e r s
( new r e c i p e s ,
r a t i n g s ) .
−[
]
5 . 3 .
Option
to
share
r e c i p e s
on
s o c i a l
media
p l a t f o r m s .
6.
**Admin Dashboard **:
−[
]
6 . 1 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can manage
a l l
submitted
r e c i p e s .
−[
]
6 . 2 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can remove
i n a p p r o p r i a t e
c o n t e n t .
−[
]
6 . 3 .
Monitoring
of
s i t e
usage
s t a t i s t i c s
and
user
engagement .
7.
** Recipe
Recommendations **:
28


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
−[
]
7 . 1 .
System
g e n e r a t e s
r e c i p e
recommendations
based on
user
p r e f e r e n c e s
and
p a s t
a c t i v i t y .
−[
]
7 . 2 .
Users
r e c e i v e
n o t i f i c a t i o n s
f o r new
r e c i p e s
in
t h e i r
i n t e r e s t
a r e a s .
Event Planner App, user-specified feature requirements input prompt:
### **Custom Event
Planner
Tool **
** Overview **:
A web−based
a p p l i c a t i o n
designed
to
a s s i s t
u s e r s
in
o r g a n i z i n g
and managing
v a r i o u s
a s p e c t s
of
event
planning .
This
t o o l
should
provide
f u n c t i o n a l i t i e s
f o r
s e l e c t i n g
event
types ,
managing
guest
l i s t s ,
s o ur c in g
venues ,
and
c o o r d i n a t i n g
with
s e r v i c e
p r o v i d e r s .
** F u n c t i o n a l
Requirements
to
Implement **:
1.
** Event
Cr e at i on
and Management **:
−[
]
1 . 1 .
Users
can
c r e a t e
a new event ,
s p e c i f y i n g
d e t a i l s
l i k e
event
type ,
date ,
and
time .
−[
]
1 . 2 .
The system
allows
f o r
c u s t o m i z a t i o n
of
events
( e . g . ,
themes ,
c o l o r
schemes ) .
−[
]
1 . 3 .
Users
can
update
or
modify
event
d e t a i l s
as
needed .
−[
]
1 . 4 . A c a l e n d a r
view
i s
a v a i l a b l e
f o r
u s e r s
to
manage
m u l t i p l e
events .
2.
**Venue Sourcing **:
−[
]
2 . 1 .
Users
can
search
f o r
venues
based on
l o c a t i o n ,
capacity ,
and
type .
−[
]
2 . 2 .
I n t e g r a t i o n
of maps
f o r
venue
l o c a t i o n s .
−[
]
2 . 3 .
Users
can book venues
d i r e c t l y
through
the
a p p l i c a t i o n .
3.
** Guest
L i s t
Management **:
−[
]
3 . 1 .
Users
can
c r e a t e
and manage
guest
l i s t s .
−[
]
3 . 2 .
Import / export
guest
l i s t
f e a t u r e .
−[
]
3 . 3 . RSVP t r a c k i n g
and management .
4.
** Vendor
Coordination **:
−[
]
4 . 1 .
Platform
to
connect
with
v a r i o u s
event
s e r v i c e
p r o v i d e r s
( c a t e r e r s ,
d e c o r a t o r s ) .
−[
]
4 . 2 .
Users
can view and compare
vendor
p r o f i l e s
and
reviews .
−[
]
4 . 3 .
In −app
messaging
system
f o r
vendor
communication .
5.
** Budget Management **:
−[
]
5 . 1 .
Users
can
s e t
a
budget
f o r
the
event .
−[
]
5 . 2 .
Budget
t r a c k i n g
and breakdown by
c a t e g o r i e s
( venue ,
c a t e r i n g ,
e t c . ) .
−[
]
5 . 3 .
A l e r t s
f o r
budget
overruns .
6.
** User
Accounts
and
P r o f i l e s **:
−[
]
6 . 1 .
Users
can
c r e a t e
p e r s o n a l
p r o f i l e s .
−[
]
6 . 2 .
P r o f i l e
c u s t o m i z a t i o n
to
r e f l e c t
event
planning
p r e f e r e n c e s .
−[
]
6 . 3 .
Saving
and
a c c e s s i n g
p a s t
and upcoming
events .
7.
** N o t i f i c a t i o n s
and Reminders **:
−[
]
7 . 1 .
Automated
email /SMS n o t i f i c a t i o n s
f o r
event
m i l e s t o n e s .
−[
]
7 . 2 .
Customizable
reminders
f o r
t a s k s
and
d e a d l i n e s .
8.
** Reporting
and
A n a l y t i c s **:
−[
]
8 . 1 .
Generate
r e p o r t s
on
event
s uccess
m e t r i c s
( attendance ,
budget
adherence ) .
−[
]
8 . 2 .
Feedback
c o l l e c t i o n
from
g u e s t s
and
vendors
post −event .
9.
**Admin Dashboard **:
−[
]
9 . 1 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can
monitor
and manage
user
a c t i v i t i e s .
−[
]
9 . 2 .
System
performance
a n a l y t i c s
and
user
engagement
s t a t i s t i c s .
−[
]
9 . 3 .
Manage vendor
l i s t i n g s
and
p la t fo r m
c o n t e n t .
10.
** S e c u r i t y
and Data
Privacy **:
−[
]
1 0 . 1 .
Ensuring
user
data
p r o t e c t i o n
and
p rivacy .
−[
]
1 0 . 2 .
Secure
payment
gateway
i n t e g r a t i o n
f o r
t r a n s a c t i o n s .
Financial Tracking App, user-specified feature requirements input prompt:
### ** P er s on a l
Finance
Tracking
A p p l i c a t i o n **
** Overview **:
A comprehensive
t o o l
f o r
managing
p e r s o n a l
finances ,
i n c l u d i n g
t r a c k i n g
expenses ,
incomes ,
investments ,
and
s e t t i n g
budget
goals .
** F u n c t i o n a l
Requirements
to
implement **:
1.
** Account and
S e c u r i t y **:
−[
]
1 . 1 .
Users
can
c r e a t e
and manage
t h e i r
p e r s o n a l
account .
−[
]
1 . 2 .
Secure
l i n k i n g
of
bank
accounts .
−[
]
1 . 3 .
Multi −f a c t o r
a u t h e n t i c a t i o n
f o r
enhanced
s e c u r i t y .
2.
** Expense and Income
Tracking **:
−[
]
2 . 1 .
Manual and
automatic
import
of
expenses
and incomes .
−[
]
2 . 2 .
C a t e g o r i z a t i o n
of
expenses
and income
sources .
−[
]
2 . 3 .
V i s u a l i z a t i o n
of
expense
and income
h i s t o r y .
3.
** Budget Management **:
−[
]
3 . 1 .
S e t t i n g
and
a d j u s t i n g
monthly
budget
goals .
−[
]
3 . 2 .
A l e r t s
f o r
ne aring
budget
l i m i t s .
−[
]
3 . 3 .
Analysis
of
spending
p a t t e r n s
to
suggest
budget
a d j u s t m e n t s .
4.
** Investment
Overview **:
−[
]
4 . 1 .
I n t e g r a t i o n
with
investment
accounts .
−[
]
4 . 2 .
Tracking
investment
performance
and
balance .
−[
]
4 . 3 .
Overview
of
a s s e t
a l l o c a t i o n .
5.
** Reports
and
A l e r t s **:
−[
]
5 . 1 .
Generation
of
f i n a n c i a l
r e p o r t s
( e . g . ,
monthly
summaries ) .
−[
]
5 . 2 .
Customizable
a l e r t s
f o r
unusual
spending
or
i m p o r t a n t
reminders .
E.2
HUMANEVAL BENCHMARK
We use the standard HumanEval benchmark, as introduced by Chen et al. (2021). This benchmark
evaluates the task of the underlying LLM-based method to generate standalone Python functions
29


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
from a given docstring, and evaluates the correctness of the generated code function through held out
unit tests. The benchmark consists of 164 hand-written programming problems with unit tests, which
aim to assess language comprehension, algorithms, and simple mathematics, of which the authors
(Chen et al., 2021) compare these to simple software interview questions.
F
BENCHMARK METHOD IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
In the following, we detail all implementation details of our benchmark methods, including that of
the full low-level implementation details of Code-L2MAC in Appendix F.1.
AutoGPT. We chose to compare against the most competitive and popular autonomous agent LLM
with memory method, that of AutoGPT (Richards, 2023). This uses GPT4 as the underlying LLM.
Like other autonomous agents, the first step of AutoGPT is to summarize the user-specified task
into a name, role, and five one-sentence goals for the agent to complete; this summary is kept in
context throughout execution. At each step, until the goals have been achieved, the underlying LLM
receives a ReACT (Yao et al., 2022) message template to reason, plan, and act by selecting the next
tool to call. Specifically, we used the latest stable version of AutoGPT, 0.4.7, enabled local tool
execution, and disabled searching the web for answers to ensure a fair comparison. It is interesting
to note that AutoGPT also has tool functionality and has tools to read, write, and list files in a local
file store—making it the most competitive and applicable baseline to compare against. Although
other autonomous agent LLM methods exist, they do not possess the ability to read or write to an
external file store in the same manner as AutoGPT. Importantly, AutoGPT, when running, would
sometimes have runs where it would fail to complete the task, i.e., fail to output any code or get stuck
in an infinite loop. When such failures occurred, we classified these runs failures and excluded them
from the results. This method defaults to use the LLM with a temperature of 0.
GPT4. We also chose to compare with the single GPT4 LLM (GPT4) (OpenAI, 2023), which we
adapt to make it competitive by providing it with the same tools that Code–L2MAC uses, forming an
ablation of just using an LLM processor without the control unit. Specifically, we provide it with
exactly the same messages and experimental setup as Code-L2MAC, including the same system
message and prompt format message; however, it is limited to only respond with one long single
response that can fill up the entire context window Ct.
CodeT. We build upon our GPT4 method implementation above and implement CodeT a recent
state-of-the-art method for code snippet generation (Chen et al., 2022). CodeT samples independent
generated code outputs, and uses the same LLM to generate test cases for the code samples, it them
executes the code samples using the generated test cases and performs a dual execution agreement,
to return the output code sample that performs the best against the generated tests. To make this
method more competitive when applied to large codebase generation tasks, it is possible generate a
given codebase statisfying the user given feature requirements, however with many different possible
implementation approaches (of splitting components, classes and across files and folders)—therefore
instead of sampling tests independently of the generated codebase, we follow our setup with GPT4
and Code-L2MAC and generate a codebase and unit tests at the same time so they match the given
implementation. We repeat this generation independently for n = 3 times, and run the codebase
against the generated tests, and rank the codebases in order of the number of tests that pass, and
return the codebase that passes the highest number of self generated tests.
Self-Refine. Similarly, we also build upon our GPT4 method implementation above and implement
Self-Refine, another recent state-of-the-art method for code snippet generation (Madaan et al., 2023).
Self-Refine, uses iterative self-refinement that alternates between using an underlying LLM to provide
feedback and refine a given generated LLM output, to create a higher quality output. Specifically,
given an initial LLM generated codebase output, we use the same LLM to provide verbal feedback
on how it could have improved the codebase to the given original task, and then using this verbal
feedback within the same context window, we refine the previously generated codebase. This process
is repeated n = 3 times, as in line with n = 3 used in by Madaan et al. (2023). We followed the
same coding task setup as in Madaan et al. (2023) to make this method competitive. Furthermore to
make it more competitive, after generating the codebase, we use the same error checking methods in
Code-L2MAC and include in context the result of any code errors found and the result of any tests
generated that are failing, so it can also use this signal to improve upon the generated codebase.
30


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Reflexion. Likewise, we also build upon our GPT4 method implementation above and implement
Reflexion, another recent state-of-the-art method for code snippet generation (Madaan et al., 2023).
Reflexion, another reflecting LLM approach, uses the same LLM to reflect on the trajectory (outputs
of an LLM) once an environment episode (task) has been completed to provide verbal feedback on
how the task could have been completed better. These verbal feedback signals are then persisted
in an episodic append-only (list) memory buffer and are given in context upon the next episode of
completing the task from scratch (re-starting the environment). Reflexion converts a binary or scalar
feedback from the environment into its verbal feedback, that is then used as additional context for
the LLM in the next episode. To make Reflexion more competitive, after generating the codebase
we use the same error checking methods in Code-L2MAC and include in context the result of any
code errors found and the result of any tests generated that are failing appended to the context after
generating the codebase. Specifically, Reflexion follows an iterative process where it generates a
codebase given the same initial prompt as Code-L2MAC and existing methods, then it is asked to
evaluate the codebase for the number of features fully and functionally implemented as listed in
the input prompt, giving a scalar score (the reward signal for the environment), which is apended
to the context window. This is followed by the self-reflection step, where it is asked to analyze the
trajectory (codebase, the evaluated scalar feedback) to produce a summary on how it could improve
(verbal experience feedback for that episode). This summary is then stored in an external buffer. We
then reset the context window window, starting with the initial task prompt plus the verbal lessons
from the external buffer, and repeat this iterative process n = 3 times be be competitive. We follow
Reflexion’s code programming setup and prompts, adapting them to our task to be more competitive.
Code-L2MAC. Our proposed method uses the message and function definitions defined in Ap-
pendix F.1. Using these, it then follows the pseudocode for the control unit, as outlined in Algorithm 1,
and generates a prompt program of instructions I and iterates each dialog turn of the control unit
control flow loop until all instructions are complete. There are a few other minor implementation
details, which we also detail here. We impose a maximum number of times an instruction can be
re-tried rMax, with a new context window when, during the execution of that instruction, it attempts
to exceed the context window, forcing the context window to restart the instruction with the summary
of the current progress made—we empirically set rMax = 30. When the current number of retries
exceeds rMax, we class this run as a failure and exclude its results. Importantly, at such a failure, the
method could ideally either await human input for correction or continue with an errored state. We
used the LLM of GPT4-0613, and when using it throughout, set the temperature to 0.01. Additionally,
another implementation detail is that when the CU detects that it is stuck in a loop repeating the
same two messages over again by comparing the most recent two messages in the context window,
it increases the temperature of the LLM by 0.1 and continues until the temperature caps at 1.0, and
then after it exits the loop reducing the temperature back to 0.01. This is to have a form of simulated
annealing of introducing randomness to escape the local minima. In the following, Appendix F.1, we
detail special message templates exactly.
F.1
CODE-L2MAC LOW LEVEL IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We follow the same setup as outlined in Appendix C, and in the following, we provide exact low-level
implementation details. We use GPT-4-0613, which has fine-tuned support for function calls, and use
the function definition file of the following.
Function definitions:
{
"name " :
" p r o v i d e _ d e t a i l e d _ s u b _ t a s k _ s t e p s _ f o r _ s u b _ a g e n t s " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" For
producing
a
step −by−s t e p
plan ,
where
each
s t e p
paragraph
i s
a
d e t a i l e d
sub −t a s k
s t e p
f o r
a
s e p a r a t e
sub −agent
( l a r g e
language
model
agent )
to
complete .
Within
each
d e t a i l e d
s t e p
paragraph ,
always
i n c l u d e
a
l a s t
s e nt e n c e
to
c r e a t e
and
run
t e s t s
when implementing
or
w r i t i n g
code
in
t h a t
same
s t e p . " ,
" parameters " :
{
" type " :
" o b j e c t " ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " :
{
" s t e p s " :
{
" type " :
" a r r a y " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" L i s t
of
s t r i n g s ,
where
each
s t r i n g
i s
a
s e p a r a t e
s t e p
sub −t a s k
paragraph
f o r
a
s e p a r a t e
sub −
agent
to
complete .
Within
each
d e t a i l e d
s t e p
paragraph ,
always
i n c l u d e
a
l a s t
se n t en c e
to
c r e a t e
and
run
t e s t s
when implementing
or
w r i t i n g
code
in
t h a t
same
s t e p . " ,
" items " :
{
" type " :
" s t r i n g " ,
}
} ,
} ,
" r e q u i r e d " :
[ " s t e p s " ] ,
} ,
} ,
{
"name " :
" sub_task_step_complete " ,
31


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" Call
t h i s
f u n c t i o n
when the
user
s p e c i f i e d
sub
t a s k
s t e p
has
been
completed . " ,
" parameters " :
{
" type " :
" o b j e c t " ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " :
{} ,
} ,
} ,
{
"name " :
" v i e w _ f i l e s " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" P r i n t
out
the
f i l e
c o n t e n t s
i n t o
the
response
to
view . " ,
" parameters " :
{
" type " :
" o b j e c t " ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " :
{
" f i l e s " :
{
" type " :
" a r r a y " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" l i s t
of
the
f i l e s
to
view " ,
" items " :
{
" type " :
" s t r i n g "
# assuming
each
f i l e
i s
r e p r e s e n t e d
as
a
s t r i n g
}
} ,
} ,
" r e q u i r e d " :
[ " f i l e s " ] ,
} ,
} ,
{
"name " :
" r u n _ p y t h o n _ f i l e " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
"Run python
f i l e
and
r e t u r n
the
output
to
the
response
to
view .
That
i s
with
’ python3
file_name_to_run
’ . " ,
" parameters " :
{
" type " :
" o b j e c t " ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " :
{
" file_name_to_run " :
{
" type " :
" s t r i n g " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" f i l e
name to
run " ,
} ,
" arguments " :
{
" type " :
" a r r a y " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" o p t i o n a l
run
arguments " ,
" items " :
{
" type " :
" s t r i n g "
}
} ,
} ,
" r e q u i r e d " :
[ " file_name_to_run " ] ,
} ,
} ,
{
"name " :
" p y t e s t _ f i l e s " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
"Run
p y t e s t
on
the
i n p u t
f i l e
names and
p r i n t
out
the
r e s u l t s
to
the
response
to
view .
I f
no
f i l e
names
are
provided ,
p y t e s t
runs
on
a l l
f i l e s . " ,
" parameters " :
{
" type " :
" o b j e c t " ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " :
{
" f i l e s _ t o _ t e s t " :
{
" type " :
" a r r a y " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" f i l e
names
to
run
p y t e s t
on " ,
" items " :
{
" type " :
" s t r i n g "
}
} ,
} ,
} ,
} ,
{
"name " :
" w r i t e _ f i l e s " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" Write
out
m u l t i p l e
f i l e s
and
i t
w i l l
be combined
i n t o
the
e x i s t i n g
codebase .
Always
output
the
whole
f i l e . You always
i n d e n t
code
with
t a b s . " ,
" parameters " :
{
" type " :
" o b j e c t " ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " :
{
" f i l e s _ a n d _ c o n t e n t s " :
{
" type " :
" a r r a y " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
’ l i s t
of
f i l e s
and
t h e i r
c o n t e n t s . ’ ,
" items " :
{
" type " :
" o b j e c t " ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " :
{
" f i l e _ p a t h " :
{
" type " :
" s t r i n g " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" Path
to
the
f i l e "
} ,
" f i l e _ c o n t e n t s " :
{
" type " :
" s t r i n g " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" Contents
of
the
f i l e "
}
} ,
" r e q u i r e d " :
[ " f i l e _ p a t h " ,
" f i l e _ c o n t e n t s " ]
}
}
} ,
" r e q u i r e d " :
[ " f i l e s _ a n d _ c o n t e n t s " ] ,
} ,
} ,
{
"name " :
" d e l e t e _ f i l e s " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" Delete
f i l e s .
Specify
the
f i l e
names ,
and
t h e s e
f i l e s
w i l l
be
d e l e t e d .
I f
you
s p e c i f y
the
f i l e
name
’ −1 ’
a l l
f i l e s
in
the
f o l d e r
w i l l
be
d e l e t e d . " ,
" parameters " :
{
" type " :
" o b j e c t " ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " :
{
" f i l e s " :
{
" type " :
" a r r a y " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n " :
" l i s t
of
the
f i l e s
to
d e l e t e .
I f
you
provide
a
f i l e
name of
’ −1 ’
a l l
f i l e s
in
the
f o l d e r
w i l l
be
d e l e t e d . " ,
" items " :
{
" type " :
" s t r i n g "
}
} ,
} ,
32


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
" r e q u i r e d " :
[ " f i l e s " ] ,
} ,
}
With Code-L2MAC we use the following system message (OpenAI, 2023) Ms, and include it all
context windows Ct, which is standard to do so (OpenAI, 2023).
System message Ms:
O b j e c t i v e :
Write
code
f o r
a
l a r g e
system
design
t a s k .
Please
note
t h a t
the
code
should
be
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
Only use
the
f u n c t i o n s
you have
been
provided
with .
Only use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
to
output
code .
You must
a c t
autonomously
and you
w i l l
r e c e i v e
no human
i n p u t
a t
any
s t a g e . You have
to
r e t u r n
as
output
the
complete
code
f o r
completing
t h i s
task ,
and
c o r r e c t l y
i n c o r p o r a t e
i t
i n t o
the
e x i s t i n g
codebase .
You always
w r i t e
out
the
whole
f i l e
c o n t e n t s . You always
i n d e n t
code
with
t a b s .
Please
always
view
the
f i l e s
before
w r i t i n g
to
them ,
to make sure
you
are
w r i t i n g
to
the
c o r r e c t
f i l e s .
When w r i t i n g
a
t e s t ,
make the
filename
s t a r t
with
the
p r e f i x
’ t e s t _ ’ .
Provide
the
minimal
code
n e c e s s a r y
to
achieve
the
t a s k
c o n d i t i o n e d
on
the
e x i s t i n g
g e n e r a t e d
code −−−i n c l u d i n g
changing
the
e x i s t i n g
g e n e r a t e d
code .
You cannot
v i s u a l i z e
any
g r a p h i c a l
output . You
e x i s t
within
a Actor Model machine ,
and when you
l i s t
out
steps ,
each
s t e p
w i l l
be
taken
by a new
s e p a r a t e
sub −ChatGPT model . When you
l i s t
out
a sub −t a s k
steps ,
you can
o p t i o n a l l y
s p e c i f y
the
sub −t a s k
v a l i d a t i o n
to
check
t h a t
i t
has
been
completed
s u c c e s s f u l l y .
You cannot
use
any
d a t a b a s e s
as
none
are
setup
in
the
l o c a l
environment ,
i n s t e a d
mock a
d a ta b a s e
with
an
in memory
d i c t i o n a r y
to
s t o r e
data . No data
saved
to
disk
w i l l
p e r s i s t
between
s t e p s
or
w r i t e
o p e r a t i o n s .
I f
a
t e s t
i s
f a i l i n g
the
e r r o r
could
be
the
code ,
or
the
t e s t
i s
i n c o r r e c t ,
so
f e e l
f r e e
to
o v e r w r i t e
and change
the
t e s t s
when they
are
i n c o r r e c t ,
to make
a l l
t e s t s
pass .
Use
the
f u n c t i o n s
provided . When c a l l i n g
f u n c t i o n s
only
provide
a RFC8259 compliant JSON r e q u e s t
f o l l o w i n g
t h i s
format
without
d e v i a t i o n .
When Code-L2MAC self-programs its instructions initially, we provide it with the following prompt
template to do so, which encapsulates the user message Mu, as ‘user_specified_feature_requirements’.
Mcb bootstrap instruction:
You w i l l
get
i n s t r u c t i o n s
f o r
code
to
w r i t e .
F i r s t
lay
out
the
names of
the
core
c l a s s e s ,
f u n c t i o n s ,
methods
t h a t
w i l l
be
necessary ,
As well
as
a
quick comment on
t h e i r
purpose .
Do not comment on what
every
f i l e
does .
Please
note
t h a t
the
code
should
be
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
You w i l l
s t a r t
with
the
" e n t r y p o i n t "
f i l e ,
then
go
to
the
ones
t h a t
are
imported by
t h a t
f i l e ,
and so on .
Please
note
t h a t
the
code
should
be
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
Follow a
language
and framework
a p p r o p r i a t e
b e s t
p r a c t i c e
f i l e
naming
convention .
Make sure
t h a t
f i l e s
c o n t a i n
a l l
imports ,
types
e t c .
The code
should
be
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l .
Make sure
t h a t
code
in
d i f f e r e n t
f i l e s
are
compatible
with
each
o t h e r .
When w r i t i n g
code
i f
you
are
unsure ,
w r i t e
a
p l a u s i b l e
implementation .
Inclu de
module dependency
or
package
manager
dependency
d e f i n i t i o n
f i l e .
Useful
to know :
For Python ,
you always
c r e a t e
an
a p p r o p r i a t e
r e q u i r e m e n t s . t x t
f i l e .
Always add a comment
b r i e f l y
d e s c r i b i n g
the
purpose
of
the
f u n c t i o n
d e f i n i t i o n .
Add comments
e x p l a i n i n g
very
complex
b i t s
of
l o g i c .
Always
follow
the
b e s t
p r a c t i c e s
f o r
the
r e q u e s t e d
languages
f o r
f o l d e r / f i l e
s t r u c t u r e
and how to
package
the
p r o j e c t .
You can
use
any
package
and any
o t h e r
packages
you wish
to
i n s t a l l .
You cannot
use
any
d a t a b a s e s
as
none
are
setup
in
the
l o c a l
environment ,
i n s t e a d
mock a
d a ta b a s e
with
an
in memory
d i c t i o n a r y
to
s t o r e
data . No data
saved
to
disk
w i l l
p e r s i s
between
s t e p s
or
w r i t e
o p e r a t i o n s .
When w r i t i n g
a
t e s t ,
make the
filename
s t a r t
with
the
p r e f i x
’ t e s t _ ’ .
Python
t o o l b e l t
p r e f e r e n c e s :
−p y t e s t
−d a t a c l a s s e s
−f l a s k
O b j e c t i v e : ‘ ‘ ‘
{ u s e r _ s p e c i f i e d _ f e a t u r e _ r e q u i r e m e n t s }
‘ ‘ ‘
Understand
the
problem ,
by
c r e a t i n g
an
extremely
d e t a i l e d
step −by−s t e p
plan ,
where
each
s t e p
i s
long
( m u l t i p l e
s e n t e n c e s )
and
in
t o t a l
i n c l u d e s
every
s i n g l e
f e a t u r e
requirement
s p e c i f i e d
above ,
f e e l
f r e e
to
copy
d i r e c t l y
from
i t .
Use no more
than
10
s t e p s
in
the
plan .
Create
a d d i t i o n a l
t e s t s ,
checks
and
e v a l u a t i o n
a t
each
s t e p
when
a p p l i c a b l e
to
help make an
e x c e l l e n t
code
implementation ,
where
a l l
the
code
i s
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l .
Use
b e s t
so f t w ar e
design
p r a c t i c e s ,
and you can
output
l a r g e
amounts
of
code
a t
once .
Please
i n c l u d e
a
l a s t
s en t e n ce
to
c r e a t e
and
run
t e s t s
when implementing
or
w r i t i n g
code
in
t h a t
same
s t e p .
You w i l l
r e c e i v e
no human
i n p u t
a t
any
stage ,
so you
cannot
use a human to
t e s t .
Only
c r e a t e
a
d e t a i l e d
plan
to
begin
with ,
which
i n c l u d e s
d e s i g n i n g
and
running
t e s t s
to
check
t h a t
they
a l l
pass .
Please
be
sure
to
i n c l u d e
a l l
of
the
s p e c i f i e d
f e a t u r e
r e q u i r e m e n t s
in
the
f o l l o w i n g
plan .
Code-L2MAC also involves control messages of the following form.
Mcc Control cycle message of starting the instruction:
O b j e c t i v e :
Execute
sub
t a s k
s t e p :
{ i n s t r u c t i o n } . \ n \ n Note :
Condition
any new code
f i l e s
on
the
e x i s t i n g
code
f i l e s :
{ l i s t _ f i l e s ( ) } .
Fully
implement
t h e s e
f e a t u r e s
in
the
code ,
no
p l a c e h o l d e r s . You can now o p t i o n a l l y
view
the
e x i s t i n g
f i l e s
i f
you need
to
view them
to
complete
the
c u r r e n t
t a s k
s t e p . You have a
l i m i t e d
c o n t e x t
window so be
s e l e c t i v e
about
which
f i l e s
you view ,
only
view
the
f i l e s
you
t h i n k
you might
need
to
view . \ n \ nSummary output
of
p re v io u s
s t e p :
""{
p r e v i o u s _ i n s t r u c t i o n _ o u t p u t _ s u m m a r y } " " \ n \ nRespond now only
with
a
f u n c t i o n
c a l l
of
one
of
the
f o l l o w i n g
f u n c t i o n s
provided :
{
function_names ( ) } ,
and
i f
you want
to
output
code
only
use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
f u n c t i o n
to
output
code .
33


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Here instruction is the current instruction of operation, ‘list_files()’ a list files tool function, previ-
ous_instruction_output_summary is the summary message Mrs, and ‘function_names()’ lists the
current function names that the LLM can request.
Mcc Control cycle message of continuing the instruction:
Has
the
sub
t a s k
s t e p
been
completed
of :
‘ ‘ ‘
{ i n s t r u c t i o n }
‘ ‘ ‘
\ n \ n
I f
yes ,
c a l l
the
f u n c t i o n
‘ sub_task_step_complete ‘ ,
o t h e r w i s e
r e f l e c t
and
c o r r e c t
the
f u l l
code
to
complete
the
t a s k .
Only
use
the
f u n c t i o n s
you have
been
provided
with ,
and
i f
you want
to
output
code
only
use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
f u n c t i o n
to
output
code .
Condition
i t
on
e x i s t i n g
code :
{ l i s t _ f i l e s ( ) }
Fully
implement
t h e s e
f e a t u r e s
in
the
code ,
no
p l a c e h o l d e r s .
I f
you have
not
viewed
the
f i l e s
before
w r i t i n g
to
them ,
p l e a s e
view them ,
to make sure
you
are
w r i t i n g
to
the
c o r r e c t
f i l e s . \ nRespond
now only
with
a
f u n c t i o n
c a l l
of
one
of
the
f o l l o w i n g
f u n c t i o n s
provided :
{ function_names ( ) } ,
and
i f
you want
to
output
code
only
use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
f u n c t i o n
to
output
code .
Here instruction is the current instruction of operation, ‘sub_task_step_complete’ is the function
the LLM calls to indicate that it has completed the current instruction, ‘list_files()’ a list files tool
function, and ‘function_names()’ lists the current function names that the LLM can request.
Mcs Control summarization message for restarting the same instruction:
Please
provide
a one
or two
se n t e nc e
summary of
the
output
of
t h i s
step ,
which
i s
u s e f u l
f o r
the
next
s t e p .
Your
response
w i l l
be
used when
s t a r t i n g
the
next
s t e p
without
any
of
the
pr e vi o us
messages .
Mcs Control summarization message, for summarizing the instruction output—which is used when
continuing the next instruction.
You have
exhausted
your
c o n t e x t
window .
R e f l e c t
on your
p r o g r e s s .
Provide
a
s h o r t
co ncise
response ,
of two
s e n t e n c e s maximum ,
t h i s
w i l l
be used
to
r e s t a r t
t h i s
s t e p
from
the
beginning
without
the
p r ev i ou s
messages .
G
EVALUATION METRICS
There are no automated tools to validate the output of system design tasks, so we propose evaluation
metrics to compare the output of different methods. Large-scale code generation is unique in that
the generated code can satisfy the high-level user feature requirements specified in the input through
various possible implementation approaches.
To quantify the degree to which user-specified features in the initial prompt are effectively imple-
mented in the generated code, we introduce a performance metric named Features %. This metric
numerically represents the proportion of input features that are fully and functionally implemented
in the output codebase. The Features % is obtained by using a separate GPT-4 API call, which
iteratively examines the entire generated code to verify the functional implementation of all input
features, counting the number of fully implemented features. We quote this as a percentage of the
features implemented over the total features specified by the user. Specifically, we implement this
metric by first collecting all the generated code files from a method’s generated output and outputting
all the code files as named strings of the format file name, followed by the file contents, and pass
it into the prompt template below for the GPT-4 API to count the number of fully implemented
features. We then use a regex parser to extract the final number from the LLM response message.
We performed a human study in Appendix H.6 and find that this evaluation metric correlates to that
performed by human professional software engineers performing a manual code review counting the
same number of features implemented.
We now provide this prompt template and then provide an example of it in action.
Features % prompt template
O b j e c t i v e :
Based on
the
numbered
f e a t u r e s
given ,
you
are
to
e v a l u a t e
the
f o l l o w i n g
code and
r e t u r n
a numeric
value
f o r how many ( a
count )
of
those
numbered
f e a t u r e s
are
implemented
in
the
provided
code .
Give
the
numeric
answer
as
"FEATURES_FUNCTIONAL=
n u m _ f e a t u r e s _ f u n c t i o n a l "
in
the
f i n a l
l i n e .
Numbered
F e a t u r e s
S p e c i f i e d : ‘ ‘ ‘
{ u s e r _ s p e c i f i e d _ f e a t u r e _ r e q u i r e m e n t s }
‘ ‘ ‘
Code to
e v a l u a t e
f o r
the
amount
of
f e a t u r e s
f u l l y
implemented : " " "
{ c o d e _ f i l e s }
"""
Here ‘user_specified_feature_requirements’ is the user-specified task description, which are provided
in full in Appendix E, and ‘code_files’ is the entire contents of the codebase printed out with filenames
and the contents.
34


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
A worked example, can be seen in the following, for example Code-L2MAC for one of the runs for
the environment task URL Shortener App, with the complete user-specified feature requirements is
given, including the GPT4 call’s response.
GPT4 API call.
To e v a l u a t e
the
provided
codebased on
the
r e q u i r e m e n t s
f o r
the
" Online URL Shortening
Ser vice " ,
you can
use
the
f o l l o w i n g
numbered
c h e c k l i s t .
For
each
f e a t u r e
p r e s e n t
in
the
code ,
you can
increment
a numeric
value :
‘ ‘ ‘
** E v a l u a t i o n
C h e c k l i s t
f o r
Online URL Shortening
Servi ce **:
1.
**URL Shortening **:
−[
]
1 . 1 .
Users
can
i n p u t
a URL to
be
s h o r t e n e d .
−[
]
1 . 2 .
The system
v a l i d a t e s
t h a t
the URL i s
a c t i v e
and
l e g i t i m a t e .
−[
]
1 . 3 .
The system
g e n e r a t e s
a
unique
s h o r t e n e d URL.
−[
]
1 . 4 .
Users
can
choose
custom
s h o r t
l i n k s
( s u b j e c t
to
a v a i l a b i l i t y ) .
2.
** R e d i r e c t i o n **:
−[
]
2 . 1 .
Accessing
the
s h o r t e n e d URL r e d i r e c t s
to
the
o r i g i n a l URL.
3.
** A n a l y t i c s **:
−[
]
3 . 1 .
Users
can view
s t a t i s t i c s
about
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[
]
3 . 2 .
View number
of
c l i c k s .
−[
]
3 . 3 .
View date / time
of
each
c l i c k .
−[
]
3 . 4 .
View
g e o g r a p h i c a l
l o c a t i o n
of
the
c l i c k e r .
4.
** User
Accounts **:
−[
]
4 . 1 .
Users
can
c r e a t e
accounts .
−[
]
4 . 2 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can view
a l l
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[
]
4 . 3 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can
e d i t
or
d e l e t e
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[
]
4 . 4 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can view
a n a l y t i c s
f o r
a l l
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
5.
**Admin Dashboard **:
−[
]
5 . 1 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can view
a l l
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[
]
5 . 2 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can
d e l e t e
any URL or
user
account .
−[
]
5 . 3 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can
monitor
system
performance
and
a n a l y t i c s .
6.
** E x p i r a t i o n **:
−[
]
6 . 1 .
Users
can
s e t
an
e x p i r a t i o n
date / time
f o r
the
s h o r t e n e d URL.
** Total
Implemented
F e a t u r e s **:
[ Count
the
checked
boxes
to
get
the
numeric
value ]
‘ ‘ ‘
You can go
through
the
provided
code and
check
o f f
each
item
t h a t
has
been
implemented .
At
the
end ,
count
the
checked
boxes
to
get
the
numeric
value
f o r
the
number
of
f e a t u r e s
implemented .
‘ ‘ ‘
Code to
e v a l u a t e
f o r
the
amount
of
f e a t u r e s
f u l l y
implemented : " " "
t e s t _ a n a l y t i c s . py
‘ ‘ ‘ python
import
a n a l y t i c s
import
d a te t im e
def
t e s t _ t r a c k _ c l i c k ( ) :
""" Test
t h a t
c l i c k
events
are
t r a c k e d
c o r r e c t l y . " " "
a n a l y t i c s . t r a c k _ c l i c k ( ’ abc123 ’ ,
’ 8 . 8 . 8 . 8 ’ )
data =
a n a l y t i c s . g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( ’ abc123 ’ )
a s s e r t
len ( data ) == 1
a s s e r t
i s i n s t a n c e ( data [ 0 ] [ ’ time ’ ] ,
d at e ti m e . d at e ti m e )
a s s e r t
data [ 0 ] [ ’ ip_address ’ ]
==
’ 8 . 8 . 8 . 8 ’
def
t e s t _ g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( ) :
""" Test
t h a t
a n a l y t i c s
data
i s
r e t r i e v e d
c o r r e c t l y . " " "
data =
a n a l y t i c s . g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( ’ abc123 ’ )
a s s e r t
len ( data ) == 1
a s s e r t
i s i n s t a n c e ( data [ 0 ] [ ’ time ’ ] ,
d at e ti m e . d at e ti m e )
a s s e r t
data [ 0 ] [ ’ ip_address ’ ]
==
’ 8 . 8 . 8 . 8 ’
‘ ‘ ‘
a n a l y t i c s . py
‘ ‘ ‘ python
import
d a te t im e
# Mock d at a b a se
a n a l y t i c s _ d a t a = {}
def
t r a c k _ c l i c k ( s h o r t _ u r l ,
i p _ a d d r e s s ) :
""" Track a
c l i c k
event . " " "
i f
s h o r t _ u r l
not
in
a n a l y t i c s _ d a t a :
a n a l y t i c s _ d a t a [ s h o r t _ u r l ] = [ ]
# Record
the
c l i c k
event
c l i c k _ e v e n t = {
’ time ’ :
da t et i me . da t e ti m e . now ( ) ,
’ ip_address ’ :
i p _ a d d r e s s
}
a n a l y t i c s _ d a t a [ s h o r t _ u r l ] . append ( c l i c k _ e v e n t )
def
g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( s h o r t _ u r l ) :
""" R e t r i e v e
a n a l y t i c s
data
f o r
a
s h o r t URL. " " "
r e t u r n
a n a l y t i c s _ d a t a . get ( s h o r t _ u r l ,
[ ] )
def
get_system_performance ( ) :
""" R e t r i e v e
system
performance
data .
Returns :
35


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
d i c t : A d i c t i o n a r y
c o n t a i n i n g
system
performance
data .
"""
# For
s i m p l i c i t y , we ’ l l
j u s t
r e t u r n
the
number
of URLs and
the
number
of
c l i c k
events .
r e t u r n
{
’ num_urls ’ :
len ( a n a l y t i c s _ d a t a ) ,
’ num_clicks ’ :
sum ( len ( events )
f o r
events
in
a n a l y t i c s _ d a t a . values ( ) )
}
‘ ‘ ‘
t e s t _ u s e r _ a c c o u n t s . py
‘ ‘ ‘ python
import
p y t e s t
from
u s e r _ a c c o u n t s
import
UserAccount
def
t e s t _ c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ) :
user_account = UserAccount ( )
a s s e r t
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t ’ ,
’ password ’ )
==
’ Account
c r e a t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
a s s e r t
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t ’ ,
’ password ’ )
==
’ Username
a l r e a d y
e x i s t s . ’
def
t e s t _ v i e w _ u r l s ( ) :
user_account = UserAccount ( )
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t ’ ,
’ password ’ )
a s s e r t
user_account . view_urls ( ’ t e s t ’ )
==
[ ]
a s s e r t
user_account . view_urls ( ’ n o n e x i s t e n t ’ )
==
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
def
t e s t _ a d d _ u r l ( ) :
user_account = UserAccount ( )
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t ’ ,
’ password ’ )
a s s e r t
user_account . add_url ( ’ t e s t ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / example . com ’ )
==
’URL added
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
a s s e r t
user_account . add_url ( ’ n o n e x i s t e n t ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / example . com ’ )
==
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
def
t e s t _ d e l e t e _ u r l ( ) :
user_account = UserAccount ( )
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t ’ ,
’ password ’ )
user_account . add_url ( ’ t e s t ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / example . com ’ )
a s s e r t
user_account . d e l e t e _ u r l ( ’ t e s t ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / example . com ’ )
==
’URL removed
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
a s s e r t
user_account . d e l e t e _ u r l ( ’ t e s t ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / n o n e x i s t e n t . com ’ )
==
’URL does
not
e x i s t . ’
a s s e r t
user_account . d e l e t e _ u r l ( ’ n o n e x i s t e n t ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / example . com ’ )
==
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
‘ ‘ ‘
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . py
‘ ‘ ‘ python
import
h a s h l i b
import
r e q u e s t s
from
da t et i me
import
datetime ,
t i m e d e l t a
# Mock d at a b a se
to
s t o r e
the
mapping between
the
s h o r t e n e d URLs and
the
o r i g i n a l URLs .
url_mapping = {}
def
g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( url ,
e x p i r a t i o n _ m i n u t e s =15) :
""" Generate
a
unique
s h o r t e n e d URL.
Args :
u r l
( s t r ) :
The
o r i g i n a l URL.
e x p i r a t i o n _ m i n u t e s
( i n t ) :
The number
of
minutes
u n t i l
the URL e x p i r e s .
Returns :
s t r :
The
s h o r t e n e d URL.
"""
h a s h _ o b j e c t = h a s h l i b . md5( u r l . encode ( ) )
s h o r t _ u r l = h a s h _ o b j e c t . h e x d i g e s t ( ) [ : 1 0 ]
# Store
the
mapping between
the
s h o r t e n e d URL and
the
o r i g i n a l URL.
url_mapping [ s h o r t _ u r l ] = {
’ url ’ :
url ,
’ e x p i r a t i o n ’ :
da t et i me . now ( ) + t i m e d e l t a ( minutes= e x p i r a t i o n _ m i n u t e s )
}
r e t u r n
s h o r t _ u r l
def
v a l i d a t e _ u r l ( u r l ) :
""" V a l i d a t e
a URL.
Args :
u r l
( s t r ) :
The URL to
v a l i d a t e .
Returns :
bool :
True
i f
the URL i s
valid ,
False
o t h e r w i s e .
"""
t r y :
response = r e q u e s t s . get ( u r l )
r e t u r n
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
except
r e q u e s t s . e x c e p t i o n s . RequestException :
r e t u r n
False
def
g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l ) :
""" Get
the
o r i g i n a l URL a s s o c i a t e d
with
the
s h o r t e n e d URL.
Args :
s h o r t _ u r l
( s t r ) :
The
s h o r t e n e d URL.
Returns :
s t r :
The
o r i g i n a l URL,
or None
i f
the
s h o r t e n e d URL does
not
e x i s t
or
has
expire d .
"""
u r l _ d a t a = url_mapping . get ( s h o r t _ u r l )
i f
u r l _ d a t a
and
u r l _ d a t a [ ’ e x p i r a t i o n ’ ]
> da t et i me . now ( ) :
r e t u r n
u r l _ d a t a [ ’ url ’ ]
def
d e l e t e _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l ) :
""" Delete
a
s h o r t e n e d URL.
36


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Args :
s h o r t _ u r l
( s t r ) :
The
s h o r t e n e d URL.
"""
i f
s h o r t _ u r l
in
url_mapping :
del
url_mapping [ s h o r t _ u r l ]
def
g e t _ a l l _ u r l s ( ) :
""" Get
a l l
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
Returns :
l i s t : A l i s t
of
a l l
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
"""
r e t u r n
l i s t ( url_mapping . keys ( ) )
‘ ‘ ‘
t e s t _ u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . py
‘ ‘ ‘ python
import
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r
from
da t et i me
import
datetime ,
t i m e d e l t a
import
time
def
t e s t _ g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( ) :
""" Test
the
g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l
f u n c t i o n . " " "
u r l = ’ h t t p s : / /www. example . com ’
s h o r t _ u r l = u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( u r l )
a s s e r t
len ( s h o r t _ u r l ) == 10
a s s e r t
i s i n s t a n c e ( s h o r t _ u r l ,
s t r )
def
t e s t _ v a l i d a t e _ u r l ( ) :
""" Test
the
v a l i d a t e _ u r l
f u n c t i o n . " " "
v a l i d _ u r l = ’ h t t p s : / /www. example . com ’
i n v a l i d _ u r l
= ’ h t t p s : / /www. i n v a l i d u r l . com ’
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . v a l i d a t e _ u r l ( v a l i d _ u r l )
i s
True
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . v a l i d a t e _ u r l ( i n v a l i d _ u r l )
i s
False
def
t e s t _ u r l _ e x p i r a t i o n ( ) :
""" Test
t h a t URLs e x p i r e
c o r r e c t l y . " " "
u r l = ’ h t t p s : / /www. example . com ’
s h o r t _ u r l = u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( url ,
e x p i r a t i o n _ m i n u t e s =0)
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l )
i s
None
s h o r t _ u r l = u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( url ,
e x p i r a t i o n _ m i n u t e s =1)
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l ) == u r l
# Wait
f o r
the URL to
e x p i r e
time . s l e e p (61)
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l )
i s
None
‘ ‘ ‘
u s e r _ a c c o u n t s . py
‘ ‘ ‘ python
c l a s s
UserAccount :
def
_ _ i n i t _ _ ( s e l f ) :
s e l f . accounts = {}
def
c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( s e l f ,
username ,
password ) :
i f
username
in
s e l f . accounts :
r e t u r n
’ Username
a l r e a d y
e x i s t s . ’
s e l f . accounts [ username ] = { ’ password ’ :
password ,
’ urls ’ :
[ ] }
r e t u r n
’ Account
c r e a t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
def
view_urls ( s e l f ,
username ) :
i f
username
not
in
s e l f . accounts :
r e t u r n
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
r e t u r n
s e l f . accounts [ username ] [ ’ urls ’ ]
def
add_url ( s e l f ,
username ,
u r l ) :
i f
username
not
in
s e l f . accounts :
r e t u r n
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
s e l f . accounts [ username ] [ ’ urls ’ ] . append ( u r l )
r e t u r n
’URL added
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
def
d e l e t e _ u r l ( s e l f ,
username ,
u r l ) :
i f
username
not
in
s e l f . accounts :
r e t u r n
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
i f
u r l
not
in
s e l f . accounts [ username ] [ ’ urls ’ ] :
r e t u r n
’URL does
not
e x i s t . ’
s e l f . accounts [ username ] [ ’ urls ’ ] . remove ( u r l )
r e t u r n
’URL removed
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
def
d e l e t e _ a c c o u n t ( s e l f ,
username ) :
i f
username
in
s e l f . accounts :
del
s e l f . accounts [ username ]
r e t u r n
’ Account
d e l e t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
e l s e :
r e t u r n
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
def
g e t _ a l l _ u s e r s ( s e l f ) :
r e t u r n
l i s t ( s e l f . accounts . keys ( ) )
‘ ‘ ‘
r e q u i r e m e n t s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘ t e x t
f l a s k
p y t e s t
maxminddb−g e o l i t e 2
‘ ‘ ‘
37


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
t e s t _ a p p . py
‘ ‘ ‘ python
import
p y t e s t
from app
import
app
@pytest . f i x t u r e
def
c l i e n t ( ) :
app . config [ ’TESTING ’ ] = True
with
app . t e s t _ c l i e n t ( )
as
c l i e n t :
y i e l d
c l i e n t
def
test_home_page ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
a s s e r t
response . data == b ’ Hello ,
World ! ’
def
t e s t _ r e d i r e c t _ t o _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / abc123 ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 404
def
t e s t _ s h o r t e n _ u r l ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . post ( ’ / shorten ’ ,
data ={ ’ url ’ :
’ h t t p s : / /www. google . com ’ } )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
a s s e r t
’ s h o r t _ u r l ’
in
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
def
t e s t _ v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / a n a l y t i c s / abc123 ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
a s s e r t
’ a n a l y t i c s ’
in
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
def
test_manage_account ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . post ( ’ / account ’ ,
data ={ ’ action ’ :
’ c r e a t e ’ ,
’ username ’ :
’ t e s t u s e r ’ ,
’ password ’ :
’ t e s t p a s s ’ } )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
a s s e r t
response . g e t _ j s o n ( ) [ ’ message ’ ]
==
’ Account
c r e a t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
response =
c l i e n t . post ( ’ / account ’ ,
data ={ ’ action ’ :
’ view_urls ’ ,
’ username ’ :
’ t e s t u s e r ’ } )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
a s s e r t
’ urls ’
in
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
response =
c l i e n t . post ( ’ / account ’ ,
data ={ ’ action ’ :
’ d e l e t e ’ ,
’ username ’ :
’ t e s t u s e r ’ } )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
a s s e r t
response . g e t _ j s o n ( ) [ ’ message ’ ]
==
’ Account
d e l e t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
def
test_admin_dashboard ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / admin ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
a s s e r t
’ urls ’
in
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
a s s e r t
’ users ’
in
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
a s s e r t
’ performance ’
in
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
def
t e s t _ d e l e t e _ u r l ( c l i e n t ) :
c l i e n t . post ( ’ / admin ’ ,
data ={ ’ action ’ :
’ d e l e t e _ u r l ’ ,
’ s h o r t _ u r l ’ :
’ abc123 ’ } )
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / abc123 ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 404
def
t e s t _ d e l e t e _ u s e r ( c l i e n t ) :
c l i e n t . post ( ’ / admin ’ ,
data ={ ’ action ’ :
’ d e l e t e _ u s e r ’ ,
’ username ’ :
’ t e s t u s e r ’ } )
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / admin ’ )
a s s e r t
’ t e s t u s e r ’
not
in
response . g e t _ j s o n ( ) [ ’ users ’ ]
‘ ‘ ‘
app . py
‘ ‘ ‘ python
from
f l a s k
import
Flask ,
r e d i r e c t ,
u r l _ f o r ,
r e q u e s t
from
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r
import
g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ,
d e l e t e _ u r l ,
g e t _ a l l _ u r l s ,
g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ,
v a l i d a t e _ u r l
from
u s e r _ a c c o u n t s
import
UserAccount
from
a n a l y t i c s
import
get_system_performance ,
g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ,
t r a c k _ c l i c k
app = Flask ( __name__ )
user_account = UserAccount ( )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / ’ )
def home ( ) :
r e t u r n
’ Hello ,
World ! ’
@app . r o u t e ( ’/ < s h o r t _ u r l > ’)
def
r e d i r e c t _ t o _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l ) :
o r i g i n a l _ u r l
=
g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l )
i f
o r i g i n a l _ u r l
i s
None :
r e t u r n
’URL not
found ’ ,
404
e l s e :
t r a c k _ c l i c k ( s h o r t _ u r l ,
r e q u e s t . remote_addr )
r e t u r n
r e d i r e c t ( o r i g i n a l _ u r l )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / shorten ’ ,
methods =[ ’POST ’ ] )
def
s h o r t e n _ u r l ( ) :
u r l = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ url ’ )
i f
not
v a l i d a t e _ u r l ( u r l ) :
r e t u r n
’ I n v a l i d URL’ ,
400
s h o r t _ u r l = g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( u r l )
username = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ username ’ )
i f
username :
user_account . add_url ( username ,
s h o r t _ u r l )
r e t u r n
{ ’ s h o r t _ u r l ’ :
s h o r t _ u r l }
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / a n a l y t i c s / < s h o r t _ u r l > ’)
38


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
def
v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( s h o r t _ u r l ) :
r e t u r n
{ ’ a n a l y t i c s ’ :
g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( s h o r t _ u r l ) }
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / account ’ ,
methods =[ ’POST ’ ] )
def
manage_account ( ) :
a c t i o n = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ action ’ )
username = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ username ’ )
i f
a c t i o n ==
’ c r e a t e ’ :
password = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ password ’ )
r e t u r n
{ ’ message ’ :
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( username ,
password ) }
e l i f
a c t i o n ==
’ view_urls ’ :
r e t u r n
{ ’ urls ’ :
user_account . view_urls ( username ) }
e l i f
a c t i o n ==
’ d e l e t e ’ :
r e t u r n
{ ’ message ’ :
user_account . d e l e t e _ a c c o u n t ( username ) }
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / admin ’ ,
methods =[ ’GET’ ,
’POST ’ ] )
def
admin_dashboard ( ) :
i f
r e q u e s t . method ==
’POST ’ :
a c t i o n = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ action ’ )
i f
a c t i o n ==
’ d e l e t e _ u r l ’ :
s h o r t _ u r l = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ s h o r t _ u r l ’ )
d e l e t e _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l )
e l i f
a c t i o n ==
’ d e l e t e _ u s e r ’ :
username = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ username ’ )
user_account . d e l e t e _ a c c o u n t ( username )
r e t u r n
r e d i r e c t ( u r l _ f o r ( ’ admin_dashboard ’ ) )
e l s e :
a l l _ u r l s
=
g e t _ a l l _ u r l s ( )
a l l _ u s e r s
= user_account . g e t _ a l l _ u s e r s ( )
performance_data = get_system_performance ( )
r e t u r n
{ ’ urls ’ :
a l l _ u r l s ,
’ users ’ :
a l l _ u s e r s ,
’ performance ’ :
performance_data }
i f
__name__ ==
’ __main__ ’ :
app . run ( debug=True )
‘ ‘ ‘
GPT4 API response
The provided
code
implements
the
f o l l o w i n g
f e a t u r e s :
1.
**URL Shortening **:
−[ x ]
1 . 1 .
Users
can
i n p u t
a URL to
be
s h o r t e n e d .
−[ x ]
1 . 2 .
The system
v a l i d a t e s
t h a t
the URL i s
a c t i v e
and
l e g i t i m a t e .
−[ x ]
1 . 3 .
The system
g e n e r a t e s
a
unique
s h o r t e n e d URL.
−[
]
1 . 4 .
Users
can
choose
custom
s h o r t
l i n k s
( s u b j e c t
to
a v a i l a b i l i t y ) .
2.
** R e d i r e c t i o n **:
−[ x ]
2 . 1 .
Accessing
the
s h o r t e n e d URL r e d i r e c t s
to
the
o r i g i n a l URL.
3.
** A n a l y t i c s **:
−[ x ]
3 . 1 .
Users
can view
s t a t i s t i c s
about
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[ x ]
3 . 2 .
View number
of
c l i c k s .
−[ x ]
3 . 3 .
View date / time
of
each
c l i c k .
−[
]
3 . 4 .
View
g e o g r a p h i c a l
l o c a t i o n
of
the
c l i c k e r .
4.
** User
Accounts **:
−[ x ]
4 . 1 .
Users
can
c r e a t e
accounts .
−[ x ]
4 . 2 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can view
a l l
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[ x ]
4 . 3 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can
e d i t
or
d e l e t e
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[ x ]
4 . 4 .
Account
h o l d e r s
can view
a n a l y t i c s
f o r
a l l
t h e i r
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
5.
**Admin Dashboard **:
−[ x ]
5 . 1 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can view
a l l
s h o r t e n e d URLs .
−[ x ]
5 . 2 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can
d e l e t e
any URL or
user
account .
−[ x ]
5 . 3 .
A d m i n i s t r a t o r s
can
monitor
system
performance
and
a n a l y t i c s .
6.
** E x p i r a t i o n **:
−[ x ]
6 . 1 .
Users
can
s e t
an
e x p i r a t i o n
date / time
f o r
the
s h o r t e n e d URL.
Counting
the
checked
boxes , we get
a
t o t a l
of 15
f e a t u r e s
implemented .
FEATURES_FUNCTIONAL=15
The final line of the response, ‘FEATURES_FUNCTIONAL’ is then extracted by a regex parser.
We note that the use of the feature requirements specified as a checklist helps the LLM check
which features are fully implemented and which features are not and aids in counting the number
of features that have been fulfilled in the generated codebase according to the user-specified input
feature requirements.
Furthermore, we also incorporate standard code generation evaluation metrics (Hasemer, 2018),
such as the number of lines of code generated LOC and the number of errors # Errors in the
codebase determined by a code syntactical analyzer (Thénault, 2023). Specifically, we use PyLint,
a well-known Python syntactical analyzer, and configure it to only detect and count the number of
errors in the code, which becomes static syntax errors that arise from the generated outputs. We
configure it with the following options of ‘–disable=all –enable=E’.
Moreover, as the methods are instructed to generate unit tests to check that the generated code is
valid, we also quote how many self-generated unit tests pass with the method as Tests Passed. We
compute this metric by running a Python test tool, that of PyTest (Okken, 2022). This is configured
to automatically find all relevant python tests (default configuration), and the LLM can call this
separately as a function on only code path input.
39


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
We also include the metric of code coverage (Miller & Maloney, 1963) as Cov %. This measures the
percentage of lines of code that are executed during running all the self-generated unit tests for the
generated codebase out of the total executable lines of code. A codebase with a high test coverage
percentage has more of its code executed during running the unit tests, indicating that it has a lower
chance of containing undetected software bugs compared to a codebase with a low test coverage
percentage. We practically test this with a python code coverage tool, that of Coverage (Batchelder
& Contributors to Coverage.py, 2023), and only run this at evaluation time when evaluating the
codebase.
Experimental setup. We complete 10 random seed runs for each task environment for each benchmark
method. We then compute each metric alongside its 95% confidence intervals throughout.
G.1
MOTIVATION FOR FEATURE %
To elucidate the motivation of Feature %, we note that the metric “Is it fully functional?” is very
sparse and does not reflect the degrees of correctness that an implementation can have. As an extreme
case, it is tough to prove that a given codebase contains no bugs, and in practice, most codebases
contain bugs. This does not imply that they are not functional, although each time a bug is correctly
fixed, we can agree that the codebase has gotten more functional. Consequently, asking, “To what
degree is it functional?” is more reasonable. A way to quantify this is to ask “Of the functions/features
that I expect this codebase to fulfill correctly, how many are actually fulfilled?”. This is what feature
% quantifies. As a proxy, and in line with previous literature (Chiang & Lee, 2023), we quantify
this by having GPT4 assess what features specified by the user were implemented fully as code (see
Appendices E and G for example prompts).
H
ADDITIONAL RESULTS
H.1
HUMANEVAL BENCHMARK RESULTS
We also evaluated Code-L2MAC on the standard HumanEval benchmark (Chen et al., 2021) and
found that it achieves a state-of-the-art score of 90.2% Pass@1. We briefly describe the benchmark
here (with a complete description given in Appendix E.2), and provide a comparative analysis of
existing methods here.
AlphaCode (1.1B)
LLAMA-2
Inﬂection-2
Grok 1
Codex + CodeT
GPT-4
Gemini Ultra
Claude 3 Opus
MetaGPT
OctorCoder (GPT-4)
Code-L2MAC
0
20
40
60
80
100
Pass@1 (%)
17.1
29.9
44.5
63.2
65.8
67.0
74.4
84.9
85.9
86.6
90.2
Pass@1 of HumanEval (%)
Figure 7: HumanEval Benchmark—Pass rates with a single attempt.
HumanEval Benchmark. As introduced by Chen et al. (2021), consists of 164 hand-written
programming problems, where each task provides a docstring from which the LLM-based method
40


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
needs to generate the rest of the python function. Each task generation is then evaluated for functional
correctness by testing with held-out unit tests, which they all have to pass for that task to be marked
as complete.
Evaluation Metric. To evaluate the functional correctness of the programs generated the benchmark
uses the pass@k metric as presented by Chen et al. (2021), to evaluate the functional accuracy of the
top-k generated programs.
pass@k :=
E
Problems
"
1 −
 n−c
k

 n
k

#
(1)
Baselines. As HumanEval is an established benchmark, we quote the existing baseline results from
respective papers, from the current global leaderboard. Such methods include AlphaCode (Li et al.,
2022), LLAMA-2 (Touvron et al., 2023), Inflection-2 (Inflection AI, 2023), Grok-1 (xai-org, 2024;
Team et al., 2023), Codex + CodeT (Chen et al., 2022), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Gemini Ultra (Team
et al., 2023), Claude 3 Opus (Anthropic, 2024), MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2024) and OctorCoder
(Muennighoff et al., 2023).
We modify the prompt to include the function docstring and provide the instruction to only write
code to complete the given function for each problem within the benchmark. We also instruct in the
initial prompt that all tests should be comprehensive, interpretable, and cover edge cases. We also
performed this evaluation using the GPT-4 model of 1106-Preview.
Main Result. Figure 7 shows that Code-L2MAC outperforms all baselines listed above on the
HumanEval benchmark. Crucially, Code-L2MAC that uses GPT-4 within its multi-agent framework
significantly outperforms a standalone GPT-4 model on the pass@1 metric on the HumanEval
benchmark.
H.2
L2MAC FOR WRITING AN ENTIRE BOOK
In the following we show that a general-purpose L2MAC works for completing general-purpose long
output text-based tasks, such as writing an entire book. Specifically, we posed the task to write a
complete book based on the following input prompt below of
Write a
complete
r e c i p e
book
f o r
the
f o l l o w i n g
book
t i t l e
of
" Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta "
D e s c r i p t i o n :
" Twirls & Tastes "
i n v i t e s
you on a
f l a v o r f u l
e x p e d i t i o n
a c r o s s
I t a l y ,
e x p l o r i n g
the
d i v e r s e
p a s t a
landscape
from
the
sun −drenched
h i l l s
of
Tuscany
to
the
b u s t l i n g
s t r e e t s
of
Naples .
Discover
r e g i o n a l
s p e c i a l t i e s ,
l e a r n
the
s t o r i e s
behind
each
dish ,
and
master
the
a r t
of
p a s t a
making
with
easy −to −follow
r e c i p e s
t h a t
promise
to
d e l i g h t
your
senses .
Specifically, as we use the same L2MAC framework, as presented in Sections 3 and 4, where we now
generate output text instead of code. Specifically, we replace the error checking mechanism E(D)
from a code specific one as in Code-L2MAC to a general consistency check, for coherence of the
generated output to the existing generated previous outputs. We additionally use the GPT-4 model of
1106-Preview.
The full result of the raw generated book is given here:
t i t l e _ p a g e _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
by [ Author ’ s Name]
‘ ‘ ‘
f o r e w o r d _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
Foreword
Dear Reader ,
Welcome to
a world
where
the
simple
a c t
of
t w i r l i n g
a
fork
can
t r a n s p o r t
you
to
a
place
r i c h
with
h i s t o r y ,
c u l t u r e ,
and
f l a v o r .
I t a l i a n
p a s t a
i s
not
j u s t
food ;
i t ’ s a
n a r r a t i v e
woven
i n t o
the
very
f a b r i c
of
I t a l y ’ s
h e r i t a g e ,
a
s e r i e s
of
s t o r i e s
t o l d
through
each
shape ,
each
sauce ,
and
each
b i t e .
As you
t u r n
t h e s e
pages ,
you
w i l l
embark on a
journey
t h a t
spans
the
snowy peaks
of
the
North
to
the
sun −k i s s e d
shores
of
the
South .
You w i l l
d i s c o v e r
the
a r t i s t r y
behind
the
humble
noodle
and
the
myriad ways
i t
has
been
transformed
by
the
hands
of
grandmothers ,
chefs ,
and
a r t i s a n s
a l i k e .
I
i n v i t e
you
to
savor
the
t a l e s
of
pasta ’ s
past ,
to
r e v e l
in
the
c r e a t i v i t y
of
i t s
present ,
and
to
a n t i c i p a t e
the
i n n o v a t i o n s
t h a t
w i l l
shape
i t s
f u t u r e .
This
book
i s
a
t r i b u t e
to
the
t r a d i t i o n s
t h a t
have made
I t a l i a n
p a s t a
a
c o r n e r s t o n e
of
the
c u l i n a r y
world
and a
c e l e b r a t i o n
of
the
joy
i t
b r i n g s
to
t a b l e s
around
the
globe .
41


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
My own love
a f f a i r
with
p a s t a
began
in my nonna ’ s
kitchen ,
where
I
l e a r n e d
t h a t
the
s e c r e t
i n g r e d i e n t
to
any
dish
i s
the
love
with
which
i t ’ s made .
I
hope
to
share
a
piece
of
t h a t
love
with
you
through
the
r e c i p e s
and
s t o r i e s
c o n t a i n e d
within
t h e s e
pages .
Prepare
to
be
d e l i g h t e d
by
the
d i v e r s i t y
of
f l a v o r s
and
t e x t u r e s
t h a t
await
you .
From the
r o b u s t
ragus
of
the
North
to
the
z e s t y
seafood
p a s t a s
of
the
South ,
your
p a l a t e
w i l l
be your
p a s s p o r t
to
the
r e g i o n s
of
I t a l y .
Buon viagg io
and buon
a p p e t i t o !
[ Author ’ s Name]
‘ ‘ ‘
i n t r o d u c t i o n _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
I n t r o d u c t i o n
I t a l i a n
p a s t a :
a
t a p e s t r y
of
h i s t o r y ,
c u l t u r e ,
and
c u l i n a r y
a r t i s t r y .
From the
r o l l i n g
h i l l s
of
Tuscany
to
the
b u s t l i n g
s t r e e t s
of
Naples ,
p a s t a
i s
the
h e a r t b e a t
of
I t a l i a n
c u i s i n e .
I t s
o r i g i n s
t r a c e
back
to
a n c i e n t
times ,
and
over
the
c e n t u r i e s ,
i t
has
evolved
i n t o
a myriad
of
shapes
and forms ,
each
with
i t s
own s t o r y
to
t e l l .
In
t h i s
book , we delve
i n t o
the
r i c h
t a p e s t r y
of
I t a l i a n
pasta ,
e x p l o r i n g
i t s
s t o r i e d
past ,
the
d i v e r s i t y
of
i t s
forms ,
and
i t s
rev ered
place
in
I t a l i a n
c u l t u r e . We w i l l
journey
through
the
r e g i o n s
of
I t a l y ,
d i s c o v e r i n g how geography
and
h i s t o r y
have
shaped
the
nation ’ s
beloved
dish .
Along
the way , we w i l l
encounter
t r a d i t i o n a l
r e c i p e s
passed down through
g e n e r a t i o n s ,
as
well
as
i n n o v a t i v e
c r e a t i o n s
t h a t
c o nt i nu e
to
push
the
boundaries
of
f l a v o r
and form .
The
s t r u c t u r e
of
t h i s
book
i s
designed
to
guide
you
through
I t a l y ’ s
p a s t a
landscape
one
region
a t
a
time .
Each
c h a p t e r
focus es
on a
d i f f e r e n t
area ,
p r o v i d i n g
h i s t o r i c a l
context ,
c u l t u r a l
anecdotes ,
and a
s e l e c t i o n
of
r e c i p e s
t h a t
h i g h l i g h t
the
region ’ s
unique
c o n t r i b u t i o n s
to
p a s t a
c u i s i n e .
From the
hearty ,
b u t t e r −laden
d i s h e s
of
the
North
to
the
v i b r a n t ,
o l i v e
oil −based
r e c i p e s
of
the
South ,
you
w i l l
gain
a
comprehensive
u n d e r s t a n d i n g
of
I t a l y ’ s
p a s t a
t r a d i t i o n .
To use
t h i s
book ,
simply
begin
with
the
i n t r o d u c t i o n
to
s e t
the
s t a g e
f o r
your
c u l i n a r y
adventure .
Then ,
proceed
through
the
c h a p t e r s
a t
your own pace ,
sa v or i ng
the
s t o r i e s
and
f l a v o r s
of
each
region .
The pasta −making
t e c h n i q u e s
s e c t i o n
w i l l
equip
you with
the
s k i l l s
to
c r e a t e
your own p a s t a
masterpieces ,
while
the
g l o s s a r y
w i l l
help
you
n a v i g a t e
the
r i c h
vocabulary
of
I t a l i a n
p a s t a
terms .
Prepare
to
embark on a
f l a v o r f u l
journey
through
time
and
t a s t e .
’ Twirls & Tastes ’
i s
more
than
a cookbook ;
i t ’ s a
p a s s p o r t
to
the
soul
of
I t a l i a n
c u i s i n e .
Buon viaggio
e buon
a p p e t i t o !
‘ ‘ ‘
c h a p t e r 1 _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
Chapter
1:
The Heart
of
I t a l y
−Tuscany
Nestled
in
the
h e a r t
of
I t a l y ,
Tuscany
i s
a
region
renowned
f o r
i t s
b r e a t h t a k i n g
landscapes ,
r i c h
h i s t o r y ,
and
c u l i n a r y
e x c e l l e n c e .
The
r o l l i n g
h i l l s ,
d o t t e d
with
v i n e y a r d s
and
o l i v e
groves ,
s e t
the
s t a g e
f o r
a
gastronomic
adventure
t h a t
i s
deeply
i n t e r t w i n e d
with
the
land
i t s e l f .
Pasta
plays
a
p i v o t a l
r o l e
in
Tuscan
c u i s i n e ,
embodying
the
s i m p l i c i t y
and
r u s t i c
elegance
t h a t
the
region
i s
known
f o r .
One cannot
t h i n k
of
Tuscany
without
e n v i s i o n i n g
the
wide ,
f l a t
ribbons
of
pappardelle ,
o f t e n
served
with
hearty ,
game−based
sauces
such
as
the
i c o n i c
P a p p a r d e l l e
a l
C i n g h i a l e −a
wild
boar
ragu
t h a t
i s
as
r o b u s t
in
f l a v o r
as
the
Tuscan
c o u n t r y s i d e .
Recipes :
P a p p a r d e l l e
a l
C i n g h i a l e
I n g r e d i e n t s :
−400g
p a p p a r d e l l e
p a s t a
−2
t a b l e s p o o n s
extra −v i r g i n
o l i v e
o i l
−1 onion ,
f i n e l y
chopped
−2
c a r r o t s ,
f i n e l y
chopped
−2
c e l e r y
s t a l k s ,
f i n e l y
chopped
−2
g a r l i c
cloves ,
minced
−500g wild
boar
meat ,
minced
−1 cup
red
wine
−400g canned
tomatoes ,
crushed
−S a l t
and
pepper
to
t a s t e
−Grated
Parmesan
cheese ,
f o r
s e r v i n g
I n s t r u c t i o n s :
1.
Heat
the
o l i v e
o i l
in
a
l a r g e
pan
over medium heat . Add the
onion ,
c a r r o t s ,
celery ,
and
g a r l i c ,
and
s a u t e
u n t i l
s o f t e n e d .
2.
I n c r e a s e
the
heat
to
high ,
add
the
wild
boar
meat ,
and cook
u n t i l
browned .
3.
Pour
in
the
red
wine and
l e t
i t
reduce
by
h a l f .
4. Add the
crushed
tomatoes ,
s a l t ,
and
pepper .
Lower
the
heat ,
cover ,
and simmer
f o r
a t
l e a s t
2 hours ,
s t i r r i n g
o c c a s i o n a l l y .
5. Cook the
p a p p a r d e l l e
in
a
l a r g e
pot
of
s a l t e d
b o i l i n g
water
u n t i l
a l
dente ,
then
d r a i n .
6.
Toss
the
p a s t a
with
the
wild
boar
ragu
and
serve
with
a
s p r i n k l e
of
Parmesan
cheese .
This
dish
t e l l s
a
s t o r y
of
the
Tuscan
hunt ,
t r a d i t i o n ,
and
the
deep
connection
between
the
land
and
the
t a b l e .
The
r o b u s t
f l a v o r s
and
h e a r t y
t e x t u r e
are
emblematic
of
the
region ’ s
c u i s i n e ,
o f f e r i n g
a
t a s t e
of
Tuscany ’ s
c u l i n a r y
h e r i t a g e .
As you
r e c r e a t e
t h e s e
r e c i p e s ,
imagine
the
Tuscan
landscape
and
the
g e n e r a t i o n s
of
cooks who have
p e r f e c t e d
t h e s e
d i s h e s
over
c e n t u r i e s .
Each
i n g r e d i e n t ,
each
step ,
i s
a
t e s t a m e n t
to
the
love
and
r e s p e c t
f o r
the
food
t h a t
i s
a t
the
h e a r t
of
Tuscan
l i f e .
[ Note :
High −q u a l i t y
images
of
the
Tuscan
landscape
and
the
completed
d i s h e s
w i l l
be
i nc l ud e d
in
the
f i n a l
p u b l i c a t i o n
to
enhance
the
reader ’ s
e x p e r i e n c e . ]
Review
f o r
accuracy ,
c l a r i t y ,
and
c o n s i s t e n c y
with
the
book ’ s theme
has
been
conducted
to
ensure
t h a t
t h i s
c h a p t e r
a l i g n s
with
the
journey
through
I t a l i a n
p a s t a
t h a t
’ Twirls & Tastes ’
promises
to
d e l i v e r .
‘ ‘ ‘
c h a p t e r 2 _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
Chapter
2:
The Riches
of
Emilia −Romagna
Emilia −Romagna ,
a
region
c e l e b r a t e d
f o r
i t s
c u l i n a r y
c o n t r i b u t i o n s ,
i s
a
t r e a s u r e
t r o v e
of
I t a l i a n
gastronomy .
The
f e r t i l e
p l a i n s
and
the Po River
c r e a t e
a
lush
environment
f o r
a g r i c u l t u r e ,
giving
r i s e
to
a
v a r i e t y
of
i n g r e d i e n t s
t h a t
form
the
backbone
of
i t s
r i c h
c u i s i n e .
In
Emilia −Romagna ,
p a s t a
i s
not
j u s t
food ;
i t ’ s a work of
a r t .
The
region
i s
the
b i r t h p l a c e
of many p a s t a
shapes
and
si z e s ,
each
with
i t s
own s t o r y .
T a g l i a t e l l e ,
t o r t e l l i n i ,
and
las agne
are
j u s t
a few examples
of
the
p a s t a
t h a t
have
earned
t h i s
region
a
worldwide
r e p u t a t i o n .
42


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Recipes :
T a g l i a t e l l e
a l
Ragu Bolognese
I n g r e d i e n t s :
−400g
t a g l i a t e l l e
p a s t a
−2
t a b l e s p o o n s
extra −v i r g i n
o l i v e
o i l
−1 onion ,
f i n e l y
chopped
−1
c a r r o t ,
f i n e l y
chopped
−1
c e l e r y
s t a l k ,
f i n e l y
chopped
−2
g a r l i c
cloves ,
minced
−300g ground
beef
−150g ground
pork
−1 cup
red
wine
−800g canned
tomatoes ,
crushed
−S a l t
and
pepper
to
t a s t e
−Grated
Parmigiano −Reggiano ,
f o r
s e r v i n g
I n s t r u c t i o n s :
1.
Heat
the
o l i v e
o i l
in
a
l a r g e
pan
over medium heat . Add the
onion ,
c a r r o t ,
celery ,
and
g a r l i c ,
and
s a u t e
u n t i l
s o f t e n e d .
2.
I n c r e a s e
the
heat
to
high ,
add
the
ground
beef
and pork ,
and cook
u n t i l
browned .
3.
Pour
in
the
red
wine and
l e t
i t
reduce
by
h a l f .
4. Add the
crushed
tomatoes ,
s a l t ,
and
pepper .
Lower
the
heat ,
cover ,
and simmer
f o r
a t
l e a s t
2 hours ,
s t i r r i n g
o c c a s i o n a l l y .
5. Cook the
t a g l i a t e l l e
in
a
l a r g e
pot
of
s a l t e d
b o i l i n g
water
u n t i l
a l
dente ,
then
d r a i n .
6.
Toss
the
p a s t a
with
the
ragu
and
serve
with
a
s p r i n k l e
of
Parmigiano −Reggiano .
This
c l a s s i c
dish
i s
a
t e s t a m e n t
to
the
c u l i n a r y
e x p e r t i s e
of
Emilia −Romagna ,
where
the
slow
cooking
of
the
ragu
b r i n g s
out
the
depth
of
f l a v o r s
t h a t
t h i s
region
i s
known
f o r .
Erbazzone
( Spinach
and Cheese
Pie )
I n g r e d i e n t s :
−500g spinach ,
washed and chopped
−200g
r i c o t t a
cheese
−100g Parmigiano −Reggiano ,
g r a t e d
−2 eggs
−S a l t
and
pepper
to
t a s t e
−2
s h e e t s
of
puff
p a s t r y
I n s t r u c t i o n s :
1.
Pre heat
the
oven
to
180 C (350 F ) .
2.
In a bowl ,
mix
the
spinach ,
r i c o t t a ,
Parmigiano −Reggiano ,
eggs ,
s a l t ,
and
pepper .
3.
Lay one
s h e e t
of
puff
p a s t r y
on a
baking
s h e e t .
Spread
the
spinach
mixture
over
the
pastry ,
l e a v i n g
a
small
border .
4.
Cover
with
the
second
s h e e t
of
puff
pastry ,
s e a l
the
edges ,
and make small
c u t s
on
the
top
to
allow
steam
to
escape .
5.
Bake
f o r
30−35 minutes ,
or
u n t i l
golden
brown .
Erbazzone
o f f e r s
a
glimpse
i n t o
the
r u s t i c ,
yet
r e f i n e d
f l a v o r s
of
Emilia −Romagna ’ s
countryside ,
where
greens
and
cheeses
are
turned
i n t o
comforting ,
savory
p i e s .
[ Note :
High −q u a l i t y
images
of
the
Emilia −Romagna landscape
and
the
completed
d i s h e s
w i l l
be
i nc l ud e d
in
the
f i n a l
p u b l i c a t i o n
to
enhance
the
reader ’ s
e x p e r i e n c e . ]
Review
f o r
accuracy ,
c l a r i t y ,
and
c o n s i s t e n c y
with
the
book ’ s theme
has
been
conducted
to
ensure
t h a t
t h i s
c h a p t e r
a l i g n s
with
the
journey
through
I t a l i a n
p a s t a
t h a t
’ Twirls & Tastes ’
promises
to
d e l i v e r .
‘ ‘ ‘
c h a p t e r 3 _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
Chapter
3:
The Sun and Sea
of
Campania
Campania ,
with
i t s
sun −drenched
c o a s t l i n e s
and
the
v i b r a n t
c i t y
of
Naples ,
i s
a
region
where
the
warmth
of
the
sun and
the
f r e s h n e s s
of
the
sea
are
r e f l e c t e d
in
i t s
c u i s i n e .
The region ’ s
v o l c a n i c
s o i l
and
mild
c l i m a t e
c o n t r i b u t e
to
the
c u l t i v a t i o n
of
e x q u i s i t e
produce ,
i n c l u d i n g
the
famous San Marzano
tomatoes
and
the
re vere d
b u f f a l o
mozzarella .
Pasta
in
Campania
i s
c e l e b r a t e d
in
i t s
many forms ,
from
the
dry
p a s t a
of
Gragnano
to
the
hand −shaped
d e l i g h t s
l i k e
o r e c c h i e t t e .
Seafood
plays
a
s i g n i f i c a n t
r o l e
in
the
r e g i o n a l
dishes ,
with
r e c i p e s
t h a t
have
been
passed down through
g e n e r a t i o n s .
Recipes :
S p a g h e t t i
a l l e
Vongole
I n g r e d i e n t s :
−400g
s p a g h e t t i
−4
t a b l e s p o o n s
extra −v i r g i n
o l i v e
o i l
−4
g a r l i c
cloves ,
minced
−1 small
red
c h i l i ,
f i n e l y
chopped
−500g clams ,
cleaned
−1/2
cup
white
wine
−A handful
of
f r e s h
parsley ,
chopped
−S a l t
to
t a s t e
I n s t r u c t i o n s :
1.
Heat
the
o l i v e
o i l
in
a
l a r g e
pan
over medium heat . Add the
g a r l i c
and
c h i l i ,
and
s a u t e
u n t i l
f r a g r a n t .
2. Add the
clams
and
white
wine ,
cover ,
and cook
u n t i l
the
clams open ,
about 5−7 minutes .
3. Cook the
s p a g h e t t i
in
a
l a r g e
pot
of
s a l t e d
b o i l i n g
water
u n t i l
a l
dente ,
then
drain ,
r e s e r v i n g
some of
the
p a s t a
water .
4. Add the
s p a g h e t t i
to
the
pan
with
the
clams ,
adding
a
l i t t l e
p a s t a
water
i f
needed
to
loosen
the
sauce .
5.
S t i r
in
the
p a r s l e y
and
serve
immediately .
S p a g h e t t i
a l l e
Vongole
i s
a
dish
t h a t
c a p t u r e s
the
essence
of Campania ’ s
c o a s t l i n e ,
with
the
briny
f l a v o r s
of
the
clams
complementing
the
s i m p l i c i t y
of
the
p a s t a .
Pizza
Napoletana
I n g r e d i e n t s :
−500g pizza
dough
−200g San Marzano
tomatoes ,
crushed
−200g
b u f f a l o
mozzarella ,
s l i c e d
−Fresh
b a s i l
l e a v e s
−Extra −v i r g i n
o l i v e
o i l
−S a l t
to
t a s t e
I n s t r u c t i o n s :
1.
Pre heat
the
oven
to
i t s
h i g h e s t
s e t t i n g ,
i d e a l l y
250 C (480 F )
or
higher .
2.
Roll
out
the
pizza
dough
to
form a
t h i n
base
and
place
i t
on a
pizza
stone
or
baking
s h e e t .
3.
Spread
the
crushed
tomatoes
over
the
base ,
l e a v i n g
a
small
border .
43


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
4.
D i s t r i b u t e
the
mozzarella
s l i c e s
and
b a s i l
l e a v e s
on top
of
the
tomatoes .
5.
D r i z z l e
with
o l i v e
o i l
and
s p r i n k l e
with
s a l t .
6.
Bake
f o r
8−10 minutes ,
or
u n t i l
the
c r u s t
i s
golden
and
the
cheese
i s
bubbling .
Pizza
Napoletana ,
with
i t s
soft ,
chewy
c r u s t
and
f r e s h
toppings ,
i s
a
beloved
s t a p l e
of
Campanian
c u i s i n e
and a symbol
of
I t a l i a n
food
c u l t u r e
around
the
world .
[ Note :
High −q u a l i t y
images
of
the
Campania
landscape
and
the
completed
d i s h e s
w i l l
be
i nc l ud e d
in
the
f i n a l
p u b l i c a t i o n
to
enhance
the
reader ’ s
e x p e r i e n c e . ]
Review
f o r
accuracy ,
c l a r i t y ,
and
c o n s i s t e n c y
with
the
book ’ s theme
has
been
conducted
to
ensure
t h a t
t h i s
c h a p t e r
a l i g n s
with
the
journey
through
I t a l i a n
p a s t a
t h a t
’ Twirls & Tastes ’
promises
to
d e l i v e r .
‘ ‘ ‘
c h a p t e r 4 _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
Chapter
4:
The
I s l a n d
Flavors
of
S i c i l y
S i c i l y ,
the
l a r g e s t
i s l a n d
in
the
Mediterranean ,
b o a s t s
a
c u l i n a r y
landscape
as
d i v e r s e
and
v i b r a n t
as
i t s
h i s t o r y .
I n f l u e n c e s
from
Greek ,
Arab ,
and Norman conquerors
have woven a
r i c h
t a p e s t r y
of
f l a v o r s
t h a t
d e f i n e
S i c i l i a n
c u i s i n e .
The
i s l a n d ’ s
f e r t i l e
s o i l
and
b o u n t i f u l
seas
provide
an abundance
of
f r e s h
i n g r e d i e n t s
t h a t
i n s p i r e
the
l o c a l
d i s h e s .
Pasta
in
S i c i l y
i s
o f t e n
p a i r e d
with
the
bold
f l a v o r s
of
the
sea
and
the
sweetness
of
the
i s l a n d ’ s
produce .
Dishes
l i k e
Pasta
a l l a
Norma and
S p a g h e t t i
a i
Ricci
di Mare showcase
the
c r e a t i v i t y
and
r e s o u r c e f u l n e s s
of
S i c i l i a n
cooking .
Recipes :
Pasta
a l l a
Norma
I n g r e d i e n t s :
−400g
s h o r t
pasta ,
such
as
r i g a t o n i
or
penne
−3
t a b l e s p o o n s
extra −v i r g i n
o l i v e
o i l
−1 eggplant ,
cut
i n t o
cubes
−2
g a r l i c
cloves ,
minced
−400g canned
tomatoes ,
crushed
−A handful
of
f r e s h
b a s i l ,
t o r n
−S a l t
and
pepper
to
t a s t e
−R i c o t t a
s a l a t a ,
grated ,
f o r
s e r v i n g
I n s t r u c t i o n s :
1.
Heat
the
o l i v e
o i l
in
a
l a r g e
pan
over medium heat . Add the
e g gp l an t
cubes
and
f r y
u n t i l
golden
brown .
Remove and
s e t
a s i d e .
2.
In
the
same pan ,
add
the
g a r l i c
and
s a u t e
u n t i l
f r a g r a n t .
3. Add the
crushed
tomatoes ,
b a s i l ,
s a l t ,
and
pepper .
Simmer
f o r
10 minutes .
4. Cook the
p a s t a
in
a
l a r g e
pot
of
s a l t e d
b o i l i n g
water
u n t i l
a l
dente ,
then
d r a i n .
5.
Toss
the
p a s t a
with
the
tomato
sauce
and
f r i e d
e gg p la n t .
6.
Serve
with
a
generous
s p r i n k l i n g
of
r i c o t t a
s a l a t a .
Pasta
a l l a
Norma
i s
a
c e l e b r a t i o n
of
S i c i l y ’ s
a g r i c u l t u r a l
bounty ,
with
the
creamy
e g gp l an t
and
tangy
r i c o t t a
s a l a t a
c r e a t i n g
a
harmonious
blend
of
f l a v o r s .
Caponata
I n g r e d i e n t s :
−1
l a r g e
eggplant ,
cut
i n t o
cubes
−2
c e l e r y
s t a l k s ,
chopped
−1 onion ,
chopped
−3
t a b l e s p o o n s
capers ,
r i n s e d
−A handful
of
green
o l i v e s ,
p i t t e d
and chopped
−2
t a b l e s p o o n s
pine
nuts
−2
t a b l e s p o o n s
sugar
−3
t a b l e s p o o n s
red
wine
vin egar
−400g canned
tomatoes ,
crushed
−Extra −v i r g i n
o l i v e
o i l
−S a l t
and
pepper
to
t a s t e
I n s t r u c t i o n s :
1.
Fry
the
eg g pl a n t
cubes
in
o l i v e
o i l
u n t i l
golden
brown .
Remove and
s e t
a s i d e .
2.
In
the
same pan ,
s a u t e
the
c e l e r y
and
onion
u n t i l
s o f t e n e d .
3. Add the
capers ,
o l i v e s ,
pine
nuts ,
sugar ,
and
vinegar ,
and cook
f o r
a few
minutes .
4. Add the
crushed
tomatoes
and
f r i e d
eggplant ,
season
with
s a l t
and pepper ,
and simmer
f o r
15 minutes .
Caponata
i s
a
q u i n t e s s e n t i a l
S i c i l i a n
dish ,
a sweet
and
sour
v e g e t a b l e
medley
t h a t
can be
served
as
an
a p p e t i z e r
or
a
side ,
embodying
the
i s l a n d ’ s
complex
c u l i n a r y
h e r i t a g e .
[ Note :
High −q u a l i t y
images
of
the
S i c i l i a n
landscape
and
the
completed
d i s h e s
w i l l
be
i nc l ud e d
in
the
f i n a l
p u b l i c a t i o n
to
enhance
the
reader ’ s
e x p e r i e n c e . ]
Review
f o r
accuracy ,
c l a r i t y ,
and
c o n s i s t e n c y
with
the
book ’ s theme
has
been
conducted
to
ensure
t h a t
t h i s
c h a p t e r
a l i g n s
with
the
journey
through
I t a l i a n
p a s t a
t h a t
’ Twirls & Tastes ’
promises
to
d e l i v e r .
‘ ‘ ‘
c h a p t e r 5 _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
Chapter
5:
The Art
of
Pasta
Making
The
a r t
of
p a s t a
making
i s
a
c h e r i s h e d
t r a d i t i o n
in
I t a l y ,
passed down through
g e n e r a t i o n s .
This
c h a p t e r
i s
d e d i c a t e d
to
t e a c h i n g
you
the
time −honored
t e c h n i q u e s
of
c r e a t i n g
p a s t a
from
s c r a t c h .
With
d e t a i l e d
i n s t r u c t i o n s
and accompanying
images ,
you ’ l l
l e a r n
to
c r a f t
v a r i o u s
types
of
p a s t a
dough ,
shape
them
i n t o
b e a u t i f u l
forms ,
and cook them
to
p e r f e c t i o n .
Types
of
Pasta Dough :
1.
Basic Egg Pasta Dough
I n g r e d i e n t s :
−400g
’00 ’
f l o u r
−4
l a r g e
eggs
I n s t r u c t i o n s :
−Mound the
f l o u r
on a
clean
s u r f a c e
and
c r e a t e
a
well
in
the
c e n t e r .
−Crack
the
eggs
i n t o
the
well
and
g r a d u a l l y
i n c o r p o r a t e
the
f l o u r
from
the
i n s i d e
rim
of
the
well .
−Knead
the
dough
f o r
about 10 minutes
u n t i l
smooth and
e l a s t i c .
−Wrap in
p l a s t i c
and
l e t
r e s t
f o r
30 minutes
a t
room
t e m p e r a t u r e .
2.
Semolina
Pasta Dough
I n g r e d i e n t s :
44


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
−400g semolina
f l o u r
−200ml water
I n s t r u c t i o n s :
−Mix the
semolina
f l o u r
and
water
u n t i l
a dough
begins
to
form .
−Knead
the
dough on a
clean
s u r f a c e
u n t i l
smooth and
firm ,
about 10 minutes .
−Wrap in
p l a s t i c
and
l e t
r e s t
f o r
30 minutes
a t
room
t e m p e r a t u r e .
Shaping
Techniques :
1.
Rolling
and
Cutting
−Roll
out
the
r e s t e d
dough
using
a
r o l l i n g
pin
or
p a s t a
machine
to
the
d e s i r e d
t h i c k n e s s .
−Cut
i n t o
s t r i p s
f o r
t a g l i a t e l l e ,
or
s quares
f o r
r a v i o l i .
2. Hand−Shaping
−For
shapes
l i k e
o r e c c h i e t t e ,
pinch
o f f
small
p i e c e s
of
dough and
shape
with
your
f i n g e r s .
−For
c a v a t e l l i ,
r o l l
small
p i e c e s
of
dough
a g a i n s t
the
s u r f a c e
of
a
gnocchi
board
or
fork
to
c r e a t e
r i d g e s .
Cooking
Tips :
1.
Boiling
Pasta
−Use a
l a r g e
pot
of
s a l t e d
b o i l i n g
water
f o r
cooking
p a s t a .
−Cook
u n t i l
a l
dente ,
u s u a l l y
2−4 minutes
f o r
f r e s h
p a s t a .
−Drain
and
t o s s
with
your
f a v o r i t e
sauce .
2.
S t o r i n g
Pasta
−Fresh
p a s t a
can be
d r i e d
on a
rack
and
s t o r e d
in
an
a i r t i g h t
c o n t a i n e r .
−
I t
can
a l s o
be
frozen
f o r
up
to
a month .
[ Note :
High −q u a l i t y
images
of
the
pasta −making
proc ess
and
the
v a r i o u s
shapes
w i l l
be
i nc l ud e d
in
the
f i n a l
p u b l i c a t i o n
to
guide
the
r e a d e r . ]
This
c h a p t e r
p r ov i de s
a
p r a c t i c a l
guide
to
making
p a s t a
a t home . By f o l l o w i n g
t h e s e
steps ,
you ’ l l
be
able
to
c r e a t e
a
v a r i e t y
of
p a s t a
d i s h e s
with
the
a u t h e n t i c
f l a v o r s
and
t e x t u r e s
of
I t a l y .
Enjoy
the
s a t i s f a c t i o n
of
making
p a s t a
from
s c r a t c h
and
s h a r i n g
your
c r e a t i o n s
with
family
and
f r i e n d s .
Review
f o r
accuracy ,
c l a r i t y ,
and
c o n s i s t e n c y
with
the
book ’ s theme
has
been
conducted
to
ensure
t h a t
t h i s
c h a p t e r
a l i g n s
with
the
journey
through
I t a l i a n
p a s t a
t h a t
’ Twirls & Tastes ’
promises
to
d e l i v e r .
‘ ‘ ‘
g l o s s a r y _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
Glossary
of
I t a l i a n
Pasta
Terms
This
g l o s s a r y
i s
designed
to
help
you
understand
the
terminology
used
throughout
t h i s
book .
I t
i n c l u d e s
d e f i n i t i o n s
of
p a s t a
shapes ,
i n g r e d i e n t s ,
and
cooking
t e c h n i q u e s
commonly found
in
I t a l i a n
c u i s i n e .
−Al
dente :
Pasta
cooked
u n t i l
i t
i s
firm
to
the
b i t e .
The
i d e a l
t e x t u r e
f o r
most
p a s t a
d i s h e s .
−Bolognese : A meat −based
sauce
o r i g i n a t i n g
from Bologna ,
t y p i c a l l y
made with
a
mixture
of
beef
and
pork .
−C i n g h i a l e :
Wild boar ,
o f t e n
used
in
h e a r t y
Tuscan
p a s t a
sauces .
−F a r f a l l e :
’ B u t t e r f l i e s ’
in
I t a l i a n ,
t h i s
p a s t a
shape
resembles bow
t i e s
or
b u t t e r f l y
wings .
−
F u s i l l i : A corkscrew −shaped
p a s t a
t h a t
i s
e x c e l l e n t
f o r
holding
onto
sauces .
−Gnocchi :
Small
dumplings made from
potatoes ,
f l o u r ,
and
sometimes
r i c o t t a
cheese .
−Grana Padano : A hard ,
slow −ripened ,
semi −f a t
cheese
from
I t a l y ,
s i m i l a r
to
Parmigiano −Reggiano .
−Lasagne :
Wide ,
f l a t
p a s t a
s h e e t s
used
in
l a y e r i n g
d i s h e s
with
sauce
and
cheese .
−O r e c c h i e t t e :
’ L i t t l e
ears ’
in
I t a l i a n ,
t h i s
p a s t a
shape
i s
a small ,
ear −l i k e
round
d i s c .
−P a p p a r d e l l e :
Broad ,
f l a t
p a s t a
noodles ,
o f t e n
served
with
rich ,
meaty
sauces .
−Parmigiano −Reggiano : A hard ,
g r a n u l a r
cheese known as
Parmesan ,
used
g r a t e d
over
p a s t a
d i s h e s .
−Pecorino : A hard
I t a l i a n
cheese made from sheep ’ s
milk .
−Penne :
Tube−shaped
p a s t a
with
angled
ends ,
o f t e n
used
in
p a s t a
s a l a d s
or
baked
d i s h e s .
−Ragu : A meat −based
sauce ,
which
i s
simmered
with
tomatoes ,
onions ,
and
o t h e r
s e a s o n i n g s .
−R i c o t t a : A creamy
I t a l i a n
whey cheese
used
in
v a r i o u s
p a s t a
f i l l i n g s
and
sauces .
−San Marzano
tomatoes : A v a r i e t y
of plum
tomatoes
c o n s i d e r e d
by many chefs
to
be
the
b e s t
f o r
making
tomato
sauces .
−S p a g h e t t i :
Long ,
thin ,
c y l i n d r i c a l
p a s t a
of
I t a l i a n
o r i g i n .
−
T a g l i a t e l l e :
Long ,
ribbon −l i k e
p a s t a
s i m i l a r
to
f e t t u c c i n e ,
t r a d i t i o n a l l y
served
with
Bolognese
sauce .
−
T o r t e l l i n i :
Ring −shaped
s t u f f e d
pasta ,
t y p i c a l l y
f i l l e d
with
meat ,
cheese ,
or
spinach .
This
g l o s s a r y
w i l l
a s s i s t
you
in
b e t t e r
u n d e r s t a n d i n g
the
r e c i p e s
and
the
c u l t u r a l
s i g n i f i c a n c e
behind
each
dish .
As you
explore
the
d i v e r s e
world
of
I t a l i a n
pasta ,
r e f e r
to
t h e s e
terms
to
enhance
your
c u l i n a r y
knowledge and
a p p r e c i a t i o n .
‘ ‘ ‘
i n d e x _ t w i r l s _ t a s t e s . t x t
‘ ‘ ‘
Twirls & Tastes : A Journey
Through
I t a l i a n
Pasta
Index
Recipes :
−P a p p a r d e l l e
a l
Cinghiale ,
Chapter 1
−
T a g l i a t e l l e
a l
Ragu Bolognese ,
Chapter 2
−Erbazzone
( Spinach
and Cheese
Pie ) ,
Chapter 2
−S p a g h e t t i
a l l e
Vongole ,
Chapter 3
−Pizza
Napoletana ,
Chapter 3
−Pasta
a l l a
Norma ,
Chapter 4
−Caponata ,
Chapter 4
−Basic Egg Pasta Dough ,
Chapter 5
−Semolina
Pasta Dough ,
Chapter 5
I n g r e d i e n t s :
−
’00 ’
f l ou r ,
Chapter 5
−Al dente ,
Glossary
−Bolognese ,
Glossary
−Buffalo
mozzarella ,
Chapter 3
−Cinghiale ,
Glossary
−Clams ,
Chapter 3
−Eggplant ,
Chapter 4
−Eggs ,
Chapter 5
−Extra −v i r g i n
o l i v e
oil ,
Chapters
1 ,
2 ,
3 ,
4 , 5
−F a r f a l l e ,
Glossary
−F u s i l l i ,
Glossary
−Garlic ,
Chapters
1 ,
2 ,
3 , 4
−Gnocchi ,
Glossary
−Grana Padano ,
Glossary
−Ground beef ,
Chapter 2
−Ground pork ,
Chapter 2
−Lasagne ,
Glossary
45


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
−Mozzarella ,
Chapter 3
−O r e c c h i e t t e ,
Glossary
−Pappardelle ,
Glossary
−Parmesan
cheese ,
Chapter 1
−Parmigiano −Reggiano ,
Chapter
2 ,
Glossary
−Pecorino ,
Glossary
−Penne ,
Glossary
−Rag \ u00f9 ,
Glossary
−Red wine ,
Chapters
1 , 2
−Ricotta ,
Chapter
2 ,
Glossary
−R i c o t t a
s a l a t a ,
Chapter 4
−San Marzano
tomatoes ,
Chapter
3 ,
Glossary
−Semolina
f l ou r ,
Chapter 5
−Spaghetti ,
Chapter
3 ,
Glossary
−T a g l i a t e l l e ,
Chapter
2 ,
Glossary
−Tomatoes ,
Chapters
1 ,
2 , 4
−T o r t e l l i n i ,
Glossary
−Water ,
Chapter 5
−Wild
boar
meat ,
Chapter 1
Key Terms :
−Al dente ,
Glossary
−Bolognese ,
Glossary
−Cinghiale ,
Glossary
−F a r f a l l e ,
Glossary
−F u s i l l i ,
Glossary
−Gnocchi ,
Glossary
−Grana Padano ,
Glossary
−Lasagne ,
Glossary
−O r e c c h i e t t e ,
Glossary
−Pappardelle ,
Glossary
−Parmigiano −Reggiano ,
Glossary
−Pecorino ,
Glossary
−Penne ,
Glossary
−Rag \ u00f9 ,
Glossary
−Ricotta ,
Glossary
−San Marzano
tomatoes ,
Glossary
−Spaghetti ,
Glossary
−T a g l i a t e l l e ,
Glossary
−T o r t e l l i n i ,
Glossary
Note :
Page numbers
w i l l
be added
once
the
f i n a l
l a y o u t
of
the
book
i s
complete .
‘ ‘ ‘
For this implementation of L2MAC we modified the system prompt to be
O b j e c t i v e :
Write
l a r g e
amounts
of
t e x t
f o r
the
f o l l o w i n g
t a s k .
Please
note
t h a t
the
g e n e r a t e d
t e x t
should
be
f u l l y
complete . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
Only use
the
f u n c t i o n s
you have
been
provided
with .
Only use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
to
output
t e x t
f i l e s .
You must
a c t
autonomously
and you
w i l l
r e c e i v e
no human
i n p u t
a t
any
s t a g e . You have
to
r e t u r n
as
output
the
complete
t e x t
f o r
completing
t h i s
task ,
and
c o r r e c t l y
i n c o r p o r a t e
i t
i n t o
the
e x i s t i n g
g e n e r a t e d
t e x t
f i l e s .
You always
w r i t e
out
the
whole
f i l e
c o n t e n t s .
Please
always
view
the
f i l e s
before
w r i t i n g
to
them ,
to make sure
you
are
w r i t i n g
to
the
c o r r e c t
f i l e s .
Provide
the
t e x t
to
achieve
the
t a s k
c o n d i t i o n e d
on
the
e x i s t i n g
g e n e r a t e d
text −−−i n c l u d i n g
changing
the
e x i s t i n g
g e n e r a t e d
t e x t
where
n e c e s s a r y .
You cannot
v i s u a l i z e
any
g r a p h i c a l
output . You
e x i s t
within
a Actor Model machine ,
and when you
l i s t
out
steps ,
each
s t e p
w i l l
be
taken
by a new
s e p a r a t e
sub −ChatGPT model . When you
l i s t
out
a sub −t a s k
steps ,
you can
o p t i o n a l l y
s p e c i f y
the
sub −t a s k
v a l i d a t i o n
to
check
t h a t
i t
has
been
completed
s u c c e s s f u l l y .
No data
saved
to
disk
w i l l
p e r s i s t
between
s t e p s
or
w r i t e
o p e r a t i o n s .
Use
the
f u n c t i o n s
provided . When c a l l i n g
f u n c t i o n s
only
provide
a RFC8259 compliant JSON r e q u e s t
f o l l o w i n g
t h i s
format
without
d e v i a t i o n .
And the initial prompt to be
You w i l l
get
i n s t r u c t i o n s
f o r
a book
to
w r i t e .
F i r s t
lay
out
the
the
s t r u c t u r e
o u t l i n e
of
the
book ,
and
the
c h a p t e r s
with
d e t a i l e d
d e s c r i p t i o n s
of
what
each
c h a p t e r
w i l l
c o n t a i n .
Feel
f r e e
to make a
quick comment on
the
purpose
of
each
c h a p t e r .
Do not comment on what
every
piece
of
t e x t
does .
Please
note
t h a t
the
t e x t
should
be
f u l l y
complete . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
You w i l l
s t a r t
with
the
" d e t a i l e d _ o u t l i n e "
f i l e ,
then
go
to
the
c h a p t e r s
in
c h r o n o l o g i c a l
order ,
and so on .
Please
note
t h a t
the
t e x t
should
be
f u l l y
complete . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
Follow a
the
b e s t
p r a c t i c e s
f o r
w r i t i n g
a book ,
and naming
convention .
Make sure
t h a t
f i l e s
are
c o r r e c t l y
c o n d i t i o n e d
on
the
subsequent
c h a p t e r s
and
o u t l i n e ( s ) .
The
t e x t
should
be
f u l l y
complete .
Make
sure
t h a t
t e x t
in
d i f f e r e n t
f i l e s
are
compatible
with
each
o t h e r .
When w r i t i n g
t e x t
i f
you
are
unsure ,
w r i t e
the
most
p l a u s i b l e
t e x t .
Useful
to know :
I t
i s
h e l p f u l
to
w r i t e
a
d e t a i l e d
o u t l i n e
of
the
book
f i r s t ,
and
then
w r i t e
the
c h a p t e r s
in
order .
Always add a comment
b r i e f l y
d e s c r i b i n g
the
purpose
of
each
f i l e .
Always
follow
the
b e s t
p r a c t i c e s
f o r
the
r e q u e s t e d
s t r u c t u r e
and how to
package
the
completed
book .
O b j e c t i v e : ‘ ‘ ‘
{ t a s k _ d e s c r i p t i o n }
‘ ‘ ‘
Understand
the
problem ,
by
c r e a t i n g
an
extremely
d e t a i l e d
step −by−s t e p
plan ,
where
each
s t e p
i s
long
( m u l t i p l e
s e n t e n c e s )
and
in
t o t a l
i n c l u d e s
every
s i n g l e
f e a t u r e
requirement
s p e c i f i e d
above ,
f e e l
f r e e
to
copy
d i r e c t l y
from
i t .
Use no more
than
10
s t e p s
in
the
plan .
Perform
a d d i t i o n a l ,
checks
and
e v a l u a t i o n
a t
each
s t e p
when
a p p l i c a b l e
to
help make an
e x c e l l e n t
c o he r e nt
book ,
where
a l l
the
t e x t
i s
f u l l y
complete .
Use
b e s t
book
design
p r a c t i c e s ,
and you can
output
l a r g e
amounts
of
t e x t
a t
once .
Please
i n c l u d e
a
l a s t
se n t e nc e
to
perform
checks when implementing
or
w r i t i n g
t e x t
in
t h a t
same
s t e p . You w i l l
r e c e i v e
no
human
i n p u t
a t
any
stage ,
so you
cannot
use a human to
perform
any
checks .
Only
c r e a t e
a
d e t a i l e d
plan
to
begin
with ,
which
i n c l u d e s
performing
c o n s i s t e n c y
checks .
Please
be
sure
to
i n c l u d e
a l l
of
the
s p e c i f i e d
f e a t u r e
r e q u i r e m e n t s
in
the
f o l l o w i n g
plan .
46


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
We further modified the control unit prompts to replace instructions of generating and checking code
to generating and checking text.
H.3
ADDITIONAL MAIN RESULTS
In the following, we provide a more detailed main results table, including additional test metrics to
show the number of failed and tests that passed, tabulated in Table 3. We also provide a codebase
output example from each of the methods and observe that they illustrate the difference in quality
between the respective approaches. Notably all methods were given the exact same user-specified
feature requirements for the given long code generation task, Appendix E.
Table 3: Codebase generation system design task results showing the percentage of functional features
specified that are fully implemented (Features %), the number of syntactical errors in the generated
code (# Errors), the number of lines of code (LOC), number of failing tests (Tests Failed), and
number of passing tests (Tests Passed). Code-L2MAC fully implements the highest percentage
of user-specified feature requirements across all tasks by generating fully functional code that has
minimal syntactical errors and a high number of passing self-generated unit tests. The results are
averaged over 10 random seeds, with ± indicating 95% confidence intervals.
URL Shortener App
Online Microblogging App
Online Chat App
Method
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Failed
Tests Passed
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Failed
Tests Passed
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Failed
Tests Passed
↑
↓
↓
↑
↑
↓
↓
↑
↑
↓
↓
↑
GPT4
48.2±15.2
0±0
107±32.7
2.3±1.01
0.6±0.5
17.9±8.27
3.75±3.09
106±35.4
0.75±0.723
1.25±0.613
11±2.26
0.3±0.346
127±24.1
1.2±1
0.7±0.346
AutoGPT
25.3±19.6
0±0
136±41.9
3.3±1.91
0±0
33.3±18
0.6±0.369
148±35.5
3±2.86
0±0
23.1±11.8
1.85±2.47
220±65.8
3.08±3.34
0.538±1.01
Code-L2MAC
91.6±8.22
0±0
330±47.6
0±0
14±6.71
82.4±14.6
0±0
395±52.9
0.8±1.38
18.3±6.8
59.4±25.9
0±0
374±123
0±0
18.8±9.11
L2MAC URL Shortener App example output
/
app.py
config.py
requirements.txt
services/
admin_dashboard.py
__init__.py
url_shortener.py
user_account.py
tests/
test_admin_dashboard.py
test_app.py
test_url_shortener.py
test_user_account.py
# app . py
from
f l a s k
import
Flask ,
r e d i r e c t ,
u r l _ f o r ,
r e q u e s t
from
s e r v i c e s . u r l _ s h o r t e n e r
import
U r l S h o r t e n e r
from
s e r v i c e s . user_account
import
UserAccount
from
s e r v i c e s . admin_dashboard
import AdminDashboard
app = Flask ( __name__ )
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r = U r l S h o r t e n e r ( )
user_account = UserAccount ( )
admin_dashboard = AdminDashboard ( )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / ’ )
def home ( ) :
return
’ Hello ,
World ! ’
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / < s h o r t _ u r l > ’ )
def
r e d i r e c t _ t o _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l ) :
u r l = u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l )
i f
u r l
i s
not None :
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . r e c o r d _ c l i c k ( s h o r t _ u r l ,
’ mocked_location ’ )
return
r e d i r e c t ( u r l )
e l s e :
return
’URL not
found ’ , 404
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / a n a l y t i c s / < s h o r t _ u r l > ’ )
def
g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( s h o r t _ u r l ) :
a n a l y t i c s
= u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( s h o r t _ u r l )
i f
a n a l y t i c s
i s
not None :
return
a n a l y t i c s
e l s e :
return
’ A n a l y t i c s
not
found ’ , 404
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / account / c r e a t e ’ ,
methods =[ ’POST ’ ] )
def
c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ) :
47


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
username = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ username ’ )
return
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( username )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / account / u r l s ’ ,
methods =[ ’GET’ ] )
def
view_urls ( ) :
username = r e q u e s t . args . get ( ’ username ’ )
return
user_account . view_urls ( username )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / account / e d i t _ u r l ’ ,
methods =[ ’PUT ’ ] )
def
e d i t _ u r l ( ) :
username = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ username ’ )
o l d _ u r l = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ o l d _ u r l ’ )
new_url = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ new_url ’ )
return
user_account . e d i t _ u r l ( username ,
old_url ,
new_url )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / account / d e l e t e _ u r l ’ ,
methods =[ ’DELETE ’ ] )
def
d e l e t e _ u r l ( ) :
username = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ username ’ )
u r l = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ u r l ’ )
return
user_account . d e l e t e _ u r l ( username ,
u r l )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / account / a n a l y t i c s ’ ,
methods =[ ’GET’ ] )
def
v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( ) :
username = r e q u e s t . args . get ( ’ username ’ )
return
user_account . v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( username )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / admin / u r l s ’ ,
methods =[ ’GET’ ] )
def
v i e w _ a l l _ u r l s ( ) :
return
admin_dashboard . v i e w _ a l l _ u r l s ( )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / admin / d e l e t e _ u r l ’ ,
methods =[ ’DELETE ’ ] )
def
a d m i n _ d e l e t e _ u r l ( ) :
u r l = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ u r l ’ )
return
admin_dashboard . d e l e t e _ u r l ( u r l )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / admin / d e l e t e _ u s e r ’ ,
methods =[ ’DELETE ’ ] )
def
d e l e t e _ u s e r ( ) :
user = r e q u e s t . form . get ( ’ user ’ )
return
admin_dashboard . d e l e t e _ u s e r ( user )
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / admin / monitor ’ ,
methods =[ ’GET’ ] )
def
monitor_system ( ) :
return
admin_dashboard . monitor_system ( )
i f
__name__ ==
’ __main__ ’ :
app . run ( debug=True )
#
c o n f i g . py
import os
c l a s s
Config ( object ) :
DEBUG = False
TESTING = False
SECRET_KEY = os . urandom (24)
# requirements . t x t
f l a s k ==1.1.2
p y t e s t ==6.2.4
#
s e r v i c e s / admin_dashboard . py
c l a s s
AdminDashboard :
def
_ _ i n i t _ _ ( s e l f ) :
s e l f . u s e r s = {}
s e l f . u r l s = {}
def
v i e w _ a l l _ u r l s ( s e l f ) :
return
s e l f . u r l s
def
d e l e t e _ u r l ( s e l f ,
u r l ) :
i f
u r l
in
s e l f . u r l s :
del
s e l f . u r l s [ u r l ]
return
s e l f . u r l s
def
d e l e t e _ u s e r ( s e l f ,
user ) :
i f
user
in
s e l f . u s e r s :
del
s e l f . u s e r s [ user ]
return
s e l f . u s e r s
def
monitor_system ( s e l f ) :
return { ’ u s e r s ’ :
len ( s e l f . u s e r s ) ,
’ u r l s ’ :
len ( s e l f . u r l s ) }
#
s e r v i c e s / _ _ i n i t _ _ . py
#
s e r v i c e s / u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . py
import
s t r i n g
import random
from
d at e ti m e
import
d at e ti m e
c l a s s
U r l S h o r t e n e r :
def
_ _ i n i t _ _ ( s e l f ) :
s e l f . u r l _ d i c t
= {}
s e l f . a n a l y t i c s _ d i c t
= {}
def
v a l i d a t e _ u r l ( s e l f ,
u r l ) :
i f
u r l . s t a r t s w i t h ( ’ h t t p : / / ’ )
or
u r l . s t a r t s w i t h ( ’ h t t p s : / / ’ ) :
return
True
return
False
def
g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( s e l f ,
url ,
e x p i r a t i o n _ d a t e =None ,
c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l =None ) :
i f
c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l
and c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l
in
s e l f . u r l _ d i c t :
return
’ Error :
This
custom
s h o r t URL i s
not
a v a i l a b l e ’
s h o r t _ u r l = c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l
or
’ ’ . j o i n ( random . choice ( s t r i n g . a s c i i _ l e t t e r s
+
s t r i n g . d i g i t s )
for _ in
range ( 5 ) )
while
s h o r t _ u r l
in
s e l f . u r l _ d i c t :
s h o r t _ u r l = ’ ’ . j o i n ( random . choice ( s t r i n g . a s c i i _ l e t t e r s
+
s t r i n g . d i g i t s )
for _ in
range ( 5 ) )
s e l f . u r l _ d i c t [ s h o r t _ u r l ] = { ’ u r l ’ :
url ,
’ e x p i r a t i o n _ d a t e ’ :
e x p i r a t i o n _ d a t e }
s e l f . a n a l y t i c s _ d i c t [ s h o r t _ u r l ] = { ’ c l i c k s ’ :
0 ,
’ c l i c k _ d e t a i l s ’ :
[ ] }
48


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
return
s h o r t _ u r l
def
g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ) :
u r l _ d a t a =
s e l f . u r l _ d i c t . get ( s h o r t _ u r l ,
None )
i f
u r l _ d a t a
and
u r l _ d a t a [ ’ e x p i r a t i o n _ d a t e ’ ] and d at e ti m e . now ( )
> u r l _ d a t a [ ’ e x p i r a t i o n _ d a t e ’ ] :
return
’ Error :
This URL has
expir ed ’
return
u r l _ d a t a [ ’ u r l ’ ]
i f
u r l _ d a t a
e l s e
None
def
r e c o r d _ c l i c k ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ,
l o c a t i o n ) :
i f
s h o r t _ u r l
in
s e l f . a n a l y t i c s _ d i c t :
s e l f . a n a l y t i c s _ d i c t [ s h o r t _ u r l ] [ ’ c l i c k s ’ ] += 1
s e l f . a n a l y t i c s _ d i c t [ s h o r t _ u r l ] [ ’ c l i c k _ d e t a i l s ’ ] . append ({ ’ timestamp ’ :
d at e ti m e . now ( ) . i s o f o r m a t ( ) ,
’ l o c a t i o n ’ :
l o c a t i o n })
def
g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ) :
return
s e l f . a n a l y t i c s _ d i c t . get ( s h o r t _ u r l ,
None )
#
s e r v i c e s / user_account . py
c l a s s
UserAccount :
def
_ _ i n i t _ _ ( s e l f ) :
s e l f . u s e r s = {}
def
c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( s e l f ,
username ) :
i f
username
in
s e l f . u s e r s :
return
’ Username
a l r e a d y
e x i s t s . ’
s e l f . u s e r s [ username ] = { ’ u r l s ’ :
[ ] }
return
’ Account
c r e a t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
def
view_urls ( s e l f ,
username ) :
i f
username
not
in
s e l f . u s e r s :
return
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
return
s e l f . u s e r s [ username ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ]
def
e d i t _ u r l ( s e l f ,
username ,
old_url ,
new_url ) :
i f
username
not
in
s e l f . u s e r s :
return
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
i f
o l d _ u r l
not
in
s e l f . u s e r s [ username ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ] :
return
’URL does
not
e x i s t . ’
s e l f . u s e r s [ username ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ] . remove ( o l d _ u r l )
s e l f . u s e r s [ username ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ] . append ( new_url )
return
’URL e d i t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
def
d e l e t e _ u r l ( s e l f ,
username ,
u r l ) :
i f
username
not
in
s e l f . u s e r s :
return
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
i f
u r l
not
in
s e l f . u s e r s [ username ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ] :
return
’URL does
not
e x i s t . ’
s e l f . u s e r s [ username ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ] . remove ( u r l )
return
’URL d e l e t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
def
v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( s e l f ,
username ) :
i f
username
not
in
s e l f . u s e r s :
return
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
return { u r l [ ’ u r l ’ ] :
u r l [ ’ a n a l y t i c s ’ ]
for
u r l
in
s e l f . u s e r s [ username ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ]
i f
’ a n a l y t i c s ’
in
u r l }
#
t e s t s / test_admin_dashboard . py
from
s e r v i c e s . admin_dashboard
import AdminDashboard
def
t e s t _ v i e w _ a l l _ u r l s ( ) :
admin = AdminDashboard ( )
a s s e r t
admin . v i e w _ a l l _ u r l s ( )
== {}
def
t e s t _ d e l e t e _ u r l ( ) :
admin = AdminDashboard ( )
admin . u r l s = { ’ t e s t _ u r l ’ :
’ t e s t ’}
admin . d e l e t e _ u r l ( ’ t e s t _ u r l ’ )
a s s e r t
admin . u r l s
== {}
def
t e s t _ d e l e t e _ u s e r ( ) :
admin = AdminDashboard ( )
admin . u s e r s = { ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ :
’ t e s t ’}
admin . d e l e t e _ u s e r ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ )
a s s e r t
admin . u s e r s == {}
def
t e s t _ m o n i t o r _ s y s t e m ( ) :
admin = AdminDashboard ( )
admin . u s e r s = { ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ :
’ t e s t ’}
admin . u r l s = { ’ t e s t _ u r l ’ :
’ t e s t ’}
a s s e r t
admin . monitor_system ( )
== { ’ u s e r s ’ :
1 ,
’ u r l s ’ :
1}
#
t e s t s / t e s t _ a p p . py
import
p y t e s t
from
f l a s k
import
Flask
from app import app
as
f l a s k _ a p p
@pytest . f i x t u r e
def
app ( ) :
return
f l a s k _ a p p
@pytest . f i x t u r e
def
c l i e n t ( app ) :
return
app . t e s t _ c l i e n t ( )
def
test_home ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
def
t e s t _ r e d i r e c t _ t o _ u r l ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / random_url ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 404
49


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
def
t e s t _ g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / a n a l y t i c s / random_url ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 404
def
t e s t _ c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . post ( ’ / account / c r e a t e ’ ,
data ={ ’ username ’ :
’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ })
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
def
t e s t _ v i e w _ u r l s ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / account / u r l s ’ ,
q u e r y _ s t r i n g ={ ’ username ’ :
’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ })
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
def
t e s t _ e d i t _ u r l ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . put ( ’ / account / e d i t _ u r l ’ ,
data ={ ’ username ’ :
’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ,
’ o l d _ u r l ’ :
’ o l d _ u r l ’ ,
’ new_url ’ :
’ new_url ’ })
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
def
t e s t _ d e l e t e _ u r l ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . d e l e t e ( ’ / account / d e l e t e _ u r l ’ ,
data ={ ’ username ’ :
’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ,
’ u r l ’ :
’ u r l ’ })
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
def
t e s t _ v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / account / a n a l y t i c s ’ ,
q u e r y _ s t r i n g ={ ’ username ’ :
’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ })
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
def
t e s t _ v i e w _ a l l _ u r l s ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / admin / u r l s ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
def
t e s t _ a d m i n _ d e l e t e _ u r l ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . d e l e t e ( ’ / admin / d e l e t e _ u r l ’ ,
data ={ ’ u r l ’ :
’ u r l ’ })
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
def
t e s t _ d e l e t e _ u s e r ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . d e l e t e ( ’ / admin / d e l e t e _ u s e r ’ ,
data ={ ’ user ’ :
’ user ’ })
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
def
t e s t _ m o n i t o r _ s y s t e m ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / admin / monitor ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200
#
t e s t s / t e s t _ u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . py
import
p y t e s t
from
s e r v i c e s . u r l _ s h o r t e n e r
import
U r l S h o r t e n e r
from
d at e ti m e
import
datetime ,
t i m e d e l t a
def
t e s t _ u r l _ s h o r t e n e r ( ) :
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r = U r l S h o r t e n e r ( )
u r l = ’ h t t p : / / example . com ’
s h o r t _ u r l = u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( u r l )
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l ) == u r l
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( ’ i n v a l i d ’ )
i s
None
# Test
custom
s h o r t URL
c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l = ’ custom ’
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( url ,
c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l = c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l ) == c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( url ,
c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l = c u s t o m _ s h o r t _ u r l ) ==
’ Error :
This
custom
s h o r t URL i s
not
a v a i l a b l e ’
# Test
a n a l y t i c s
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( s h o r t _ u r l ) == { ’ c l i c k s ’ :
0 ,
’ c l i c k _ d e t a i l s ’ :
[ ] }
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . r e c o r d _ c l i c k ( s h o r t _ u r l ,
’ mocked_location ’ )
a n a l y t i c s
= u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ a n a l y t i c s ( s h o r t _ u r l )
a s s e r t
a n a l y t i c s [ ’ c l i c k s ’ ] == 1
a s s e r t
len ( a n a l y t i c s [ ’ c l i c k _ d e t a i l s ’ ] )
== 1
a s s e r t
a n a l y t i c s [ ’ c l i c k _ d e t a i l s ’ ] [ 0 ] [ ’ l o c a t i o n ’ ] ==
’ mocked_location ’
a s s e r t
’ timestamp ’
in
a n a l y t i c s [ ’ c l i c k _ d e t a i l s ’ ] [ 0 ]
# Test URL e x p i r a t i o n
e x p i r e d _ u r l = u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t _ u r l ( url ,
d a te t im e . now ( )
−t i m e d e l t a ( days =1) )
a s s e r t
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . g e t _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( e x p i r e d _ u r l ) ==
’ Error :
This URL has
expi red ’
#
t e s t s / t e s t _ u s e r _ a c c o u n t . py
from
s e r v i c e s . user_account
import
UserAccount
def
t e s t _ c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ) :
user_account = UserAccount ( )
a s s e r t
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ) ==
’ Account
c r e a t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
a s s e r t
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ) ==
’ Username
a l r e a d y
e x i s t s . ’
def
t e s t _ v i e w _ u r l s ( ) :
user_account = UserAccount ( )
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ )
a s s e r t
user_account . view_urls ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ) ==
[ ]
a s s e r t
user_account . view_urls ( ’ n o n _ e x i s t e n t _ u s e r ’ ) ==
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
def
t e s t _ e d i t _ u r l ( ) :
user_account = UserAccount ( )
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ )
user_account . u s e r s [ ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ] . append ( ’ h t t p : / / t e s t . com ’ )
a s s e r t
user_account . e d i t _ u r l ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / t e s t . com ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / newtest . com ’ ) ==
’URL e d i t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
a s s e r t
user_account . e d i t _ u r l ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / n o n e x i s t e n t . com ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / newtest . com ’ ) ==
’URL does
not
e x i s t . ’
a s s e r t
user_account . e d i t _ u r l ( ’ n o n _ e x i s t e n t _ u s e r ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / t e s t . com ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / newtest . com ’ ) ==
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
50


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
def
t e s t _ d e l e t e _ u r l ( ) :
user_account = UserAccount ( )
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ )
user_account . u s e r s [ ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ] . append ( ’ h t t p : / / t e s t . com ’ )
a s s e r t
user_account . d e l e t e _ u r l ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / t e s t . com ’ ) ==
’URL d e l e t e d
s u c c e s s f u l l y . ’
a s s e r t
user_account . d e l e t e _ u r l ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / n o n e x i s t e n t . com ’ ) ==
’URL does
not
e x i s t . ’
a s s e r t
user_account . d e l e t e _ u r l ( ’ n o n _ e x i s t e n t _ u s e r ’ ,
’ h t t p : / / t e s t . com ’ ) ==
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
def
t e s t _ v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( ) :
user_account = UserAccount ( )
user_account . c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ )
user_account . u s e r s [ ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ] [ ’ u r l s ’ ] . append ({ ’ u r l ’ :
’ h t t p : / / t e s t . com ’ ,
’ a n a l y t i c s ’ :
{ ’ c l i c k s ’ :
10 ,
’ l o c a t i o n s ’ :
[ ’USA’ ,
’
UK’ ] } } )
a s s e r t
user_account . v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( ’ t e s t _ u s e r ’ ) == { ’ h t t p : / / t e s t . com ’ :
{ ’ c l i c k s ’ :
10 ,
’ l o c a t i o n s ’ :
[ ’USA’ ,
’UK’ ]}}
a s s e r t
user_account . v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( ’ n o n _ e x i s t e n t _ u s e r ’ ) ==
’ Username does
not
e x i s t . ’
AutoGPT URL Shortener App example output
/
analytics.py
main.py
url_shortener.py
#
a n a l y t i c s . py
c l a s s
A n a l y t i c s :
def
t r a c k _ c l i c k s ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ) :
pass
def
t r a c k _ g e o l o c a t i o n ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ) :
pass
# main . py
from
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r
import URLShortener
i f
__name__ ==
’ __main__ ’ :
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r = URLShortener ( )
# Test
the
implemented
f u n c t i o n a l i t y
#
u r l _ s h o r t e n e r . py
import random
import
s t r i n g
from
a n a l y t i c s
import
A n a l y t i c s
c l a s s
URLShortener :
def
_ _ i n i t _ _ ( s e l f ) :
s e l f . a n a l y t i c s
= A n a l y t i c s ( )
def
v a l i d a t e _ u r l ( s e l f ,
u r l ) :
# Add URL v a l i d a t i o n
l o g i c
pass
def
g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t e n e d _ u r l ( s e l f ) :
# Generate a random 6−c h a r a c t e r
s t r i n g
s h o r t _ u r l = ’ ’ . j o i n ( random . c hoices ( s t r i n g . a s c i i _ l e t t e r s
+
s t r i n g . d i g i t s ,
k=6) )
return
s h o r t _ u r l
def
s h o r t e n _ u r l ( s e l f ,
u r l ) :
i f
s e l f . v a l i d a t e _ u r l ( u r l ) :
s h o r t _ u r l =
s e l f . g e n e r a t e _ s h o r t e n e d _ u r l ( )
# Save
the
s h o r t _ u r l
and
o r i g i n a l _ u r l
mapping
return
s h o r t _ u r l
e l s e :
r a i s e
ValueError ( ’ I n v a l i d URL’ )
def
r e d i r e c t _ t o _ o r i g i n a l _ u r l ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ) :
#
R e t r i e v e
the
o r i g i n a l _ u r l
from
the
s h o r t _ u r l
# Track
c l i c k s
and
g e o l o c a t i o n
s e l f . a n a l y t i c s . t r a c k _ c l i c k s ( s h o r t _ u r l )
s e l f . a n a l y t i c s . t r a c k _ g e o l o c a t i o n ( s h o r t _ u r l )
pass
c l a s s
User :
def
c r e a t e _ a c c o u n t ( s e l f ,
username ,
password ) :
pass
def
v i e w _ s h o r t e n e d _ u r l s ( s e l f ) :
pass
def
e d i t _ u r l ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ,
new_url ) :
pass
def
d e l e t e _ u r l ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ) :
pass
def
v i e w _ a n a l y t i c s ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ) :
pass
def
s e t _ e x p i r a t i o n _ d a t e ( s e l f ,
s h o r t _ u r l ,
e x p i r a t i o n _ d a t e ) :
pass
c l a s s
Admin :
def
v i e w _ a l l _ u r l s ( s e l f ) :
pass
def
d e l e t e _ u r l _ o r _ u s e r ( s e l f ,
i d e n t i f i e r ) :
pass
def
monitor_performance ( s e l f ) :
51


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
pass
AutoGPT URL Shortener App example output
/
app.py
test_app.py
# app . py
from
f l a s k
import
Flask ,
request ,
j s o n i f y ,
r e d i r e c t
from
d a t a c l a s s e s
import
d a t a c l a s s
from
d at e ti m e
import
d at e ti m e
import
pytz
import
uuid
app = Flask ( __name__ )
# Mock database
DB = {}
@dataclass
c l a s s URL:
o r i g i n a l :
s t r
s h o r t e n e d :
s t r
user :
s t r
c l i c k s :
i n t
c r e a t e d _ a t :
d at e ti m e
e x p i r e s _ a t :
d at e ti m e
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / s h o r t e n ’ ,
methods =[ ’POST ’ ] )
def
s h o r t e n _ u r l ( ) :
data = r e q u e s t . g e t _ j s o n ( )
o r i g i n a l _ u r l
= data . get ( ’ u r l ’ )
user = data . get ( ’ user ’ )
e x p i r e s _ a t = data . get ( ’ e x p i r e s _ a t ’ )
s h o r t _ u r l = s t r ( uuid . uuid4 ( ) ) [ : 8 ]
u r l = URL( o r i g i n a l = o r i g i n a l _ u r l ,
s h o r t e n e d = s h o r t _ u r l ,
user =user ,
c l i c k s =0 ,
c r e a t e d _ a t = d at e ti m e . now ( pytz . utc ) ,
e x p i r e s _ a t =
e x p i r e s _ a t )
DB[ s h o r t _ u r l ] = u r l
return
j s o n i f y ({ ’ s h o r t _ u r l ’ :
s h o r t _ u r l }) , 201
@app . r o u t e ( ’ / < s h o r t _ u r l > ’ ,
methods =[ ’GET’ ] )
def
r e d i r e c t _ u r l ( s h o r t _ u r l ) :
u r l = DB. get ( s h o r t _ u r l )
i f
u r l
and
u r l . e x p i r e s _ a t > da t et i me . now ( pytz . utc ) :
u r l . c l i c k s
+= 1
return
r e d i r e c t ( u r l . o r i g i n a l ,
code =302)
e l s e :
return
j s o n i f y ({ ’ e r r o r ’ :
’URL not
found
or
expi red ’ }) , 404
i f
__name__ ==
’ __main__ ’ :
app . run ( debug=True )
#
t e s t _ a p p . py
import
p y t e s t
import app
from
f l a s k
import
json
@pytest . f i x t u r e
def
c l i e n t ( ) :
app . app . config [ ’TESTING ’ ] = True
with
app . app . t e s t _ c l i e n t ( )
as
c l i e n t :
y i e l d
c l i e n t
def
t e s t _ s h o r t e n _ u r l ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . post ( ’ / s h o r t e n ’ ,
data = json . dumps ({ ’ u r l ’ :
’ h t t p s : / /www. google . com ’ ,
’ user ’ :
’ t e s t ’ ,
’ e x p i r e s _ a t ’ :
’
2022−12−31T23 :59:59Z ’ }) ,
c o n t e n t _ t y p e = ’ a p p l i c a t i o n / json ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 201
a s s e r t
’ s h o r t _ u r l ’
in
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
def
t e s t _ r e d i r e c t _ u r l ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . post ( ’ / s h o r t e n ’ ,
data = json . dumps ({ ’ u r l ’ :
’ h t t p s : / /www. google . com ’ ,
’ user ’ :
’ t e s t ’ ,
’ e x p i r e s _ a t ’ :
’
2022−12−31T23 :59:59Z ’ }) ,
c o n t e n t _ t y p e = ’ a p p l i c a t i o n / json ’ )
s h o r t _ u r l = response . g e t _ j s o n ( ) . get ( ’ s h o r t _ u r l ’ )
response =
c l i e n t . get ( f ’ /{ s h o r t _ u r l } ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 302
def
t e s t _ r e d i r e c t _ u r l _ n o t _ f o u n d ( c l i e n t ) :
response =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / notfound ’ )
a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 404
a s s e r t
’ e r r o r ’
in
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
H.4
CODE L2MAC IN ACTION.
We provide example transcripts of L2MAC in action below. For the environment task of the Online
Chat App.
Initial instructions planning.
[ System ]
O b j e c t i v e :
Write
code
f o r
a
l a r g e
system
design
t a s k .
Please
note
t h a t
the
code
should
be
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
Only use
the
f u n c t i o n s
you have
been
provided
with .
Only use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
to
output
code .
52


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
You must
a c t
autonomously
and you
w i l l
r e c e i v e
no human
i n p u t
a t
any
s t a g e . You have
to
r e t u r n
as
output
the
complete
code
f o r
completing
t h i s
task ,
and
c o r r e c t l y
i n c o r p o r a t e
i t
i n t o
the
e x i s t i n g
codebase .
You always
w r i t e
out
the
whole
f i l e
c o n t e n t s . You always
i n d e n t
code
with
t a b s .
Please
always
view
the
f i l e s
before
w r i t i n g
to
them ,
to make sure
you
are
w r i t i n g
to
the
c o r r e c t
f i l e s .
When w r i t i n g
a
t e s t ,
make the
filename
s t a r t
with
the
p r e f i x
’ t e s t _ ’ .
Provide
the
minimal
code
n e c e s s a r y
to
achieve
the
t a s k
c o n d i t i o n e d
on
the
e x i s t i n g
g e n e r a t e d
code −−−i n c l u d i n g
changing
the
e x i s t i n g
g e n e r a t e d
code .
You cannot
v i s u a l i z e
any
g r a p h i c a l
output . You
e x i s t
within
a Actor Model machine ,
and when you
l i s t
out
steps ,
each
s t e p
w i l l
be
taken
by a new
s e p a r a t e
sub −ChatGPT model . When you
l i s t
out
a sub −t a s k
steps ,
you can
o p t i o n a l l y
s p e c i f y
the
sub −t a s k
v a l i d a t i o n
to
check
t h a t
i t
has
been
completed
s u c c e s s f u l l y .
You cannot
use
any
d a t a b a s e s
as
none
are
setup
in
the
l o c a l
environment ,
i n s t e a d
mock a
d a ta b a s e
with
an
in memory
d i c t i o n a r y
to
s t o r e
data . No data
saved
to
disk
w i l l
p e r s i s t
between
s t e p s
or
w r i t e
o p e r a t i o n s .
I f
a
t e s t
i s
f a i l i n g
the
e r r o r
could
be
the
code ,
or
the
t e s t
i s
i n c o r r e c t ,
so
f e e l
f r e e
to
o v e r w r i t e
and change
the
t e s t s
when they
are
i n c o r r e c t ,
to make
a l l
t e s t s
pass .
Use
the
f u n c t i o n s
provided . When c a l l i n g
f u n c t i o n s
only
provide
a RFC8259 compliant JSON r e q u e s t
f o l l o w i n g
t h i s
format
without
d e v i a t i o n .
[CU]
You w i l l
get
i n s t r u c t i o n s
f o r
code
to
w r i t e .
F i r s t
lay
out
the
names of
the
core
c l a s s e s ,
f u n c t i o n s ,
methods
t h a t
w i l l
be
necessary ,
As well
as
a
quick comment on
t h e i r
purpose .
Do not comment on what
every
f i l e
does .
Please
note
t h a t
the
code
should
be
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
You w i l l
s t a r t
with
the
" e n t r y p o i n t "
f i l e ,
then
go
to
the
ones
t h a t
are
imported by
t h a t
f i l e ,
and so on .
Please
note
t h a t
the
code
should
be
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
Follow a
language
and framework
a p p r o p r i a t e
b e s t
p r a c t i c e
f i l e
naming
convention .
Make sure
t h a t
f i l e s
c o n t a i n
a l l
imports ,
types
e t c .
The code
should
be
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l .
Make sure
t h a t
code
in
d i f f e r e n t
f i l e s
are
compatible
with
each
o t h e r .
When w r i t i n g
code
i f
you
are
unsure ,
w r i t e
a
p l a u s i b l e
implementation .
Inclu de
module dependency
or
package
manager
dependency
d e f i n i t i o n
f i l e .
Useful
to know :
For Python ,
you always
c r e a t e
an
a p p r o p r i a t e
r e q u i r e m e n t s . t x t
f i l e .
Always add a comment
b r i e f l y
d e s c r i b i n g
the
purpose
of
the
f u n c t i o n
d e f i n i t i o n .
Add comments
e x p l a i n i n g
very
complex
b i t s
of
l o g i c .
Always
follow
the
b e s t
p r a c t i c e s
f o r
the
r e q u e s t e d
languages
f o r
f o l d e r / f i l e
s t r u c t u r e
and how to
package
the
p r o j e c t .
You can
use
any
package
and any
o t h e r
packages
you wish
to
i n s t a l l .
You cannot
use
any
d a t a b a s e s
as
none
are
setup
in
the
l o c a l
environment ,
i n s t e a d
mock a
d a ta b a s e
with
an
in memory
d i c t i o n a r y
to
s t o r e
data . No data
saved
to
disk
w i l l
p e r s i s
between
s t e p s
or
w r i t e
o p e r a t i o n s .
When w r i t i n g
a
t e s t ,
make the
filename
s t a r t
with
the
p r e f i x
’ t e s t _ ’ .
Python
t o o l b e l t
p r e f e r e n c e s :
−p y t e s t
−d a t a c l a s s e s
−f l a s k
O b j e c t i v e : ‘ ‘ ‘
** Global
Chat
Servi ce
(GCS) **
** Overview **:
A re al −time
o n l i n e
chat
a p p l i c a t i o n
allowing
u s e r s
to
send
t e x t
messages ,
images ,
and
c r e a t e
group
c h a t s .
** F u n c t i o n a l
Requirements
to
implement **:
User
R e g i s t r a t i o n
and
A u t h e n t i c a t i o n :
−[
]
1 . 1 .
Sign up
using
email .
−[
]
1 . 2 .
F o r g o t t e n
password
recovery .
User
P r o f i l e :
−[
]
2 . 1 .
Allow
u s e r s
to
s e t
p r o f i l e
p i c t u r e s
and
s t a t u s
messages .
−[
]
2 . 2 .
Privacy
s e t t i n g s
f o r who can
see
user
d e t a i l s
or
l a s t
seen
s t a t u s .
Contact
Management :
−[
]
3 . 1 .
Block / unblock
c o n t a c t s .
−[
]
3 . 2 .
Create ,
edit ,
and manage groups .
Messaging :
−[
]
4 . 1 .
Send and
r e c e i v e
re al −time
t e x t
messages .
−[
]
4 . 2 .
Message
read
r e c e i p t s
( blue
t i c k s
or
e q u i v a l e n t ) .
−[
]
4 . 3 .
End−to −end
e n c r y p t i o n
f o r
s e c u r i t y .
−[
]
4 . 4 .
Image
s h a r i n g .
−[
]
4 . 5 .
Emojis ,
GIFs ,
and
s t i c k e r s
support .
Group Chats :
−[
]
5 . 1 .
Create
group
c h a t s
with
a name and
p i c t u r e .
−[
]
5 . 2 . Add or
remove
p a r t i c i p a n t s .
−[
]
5 . 3 .
Admin
r o l e s
and
p e r m i s s i o n s .
S t a t u s / Story
Fea ture :
−[
]
6 . 1 .
Allow
u s e r s
to
post
image
s t a t u s e s
v i s i b l e
f o r
a
l i m i t e d
time .
−[
]
6 . 2 .
Control who can
see
the
s t a t u s .
Web A p p l i c a t i o n :
−[
]
7 . 1 . Web−based
v e r s i o n
a c c e s s i b l e
from
browsers .
C o n n e c t i v i t y
and
O f f l i n e Mode :
−[
]
8 . 1 .
Message
queuing
f o r
when the
user
i s
o f f l i n e ;
messages
are
s e n t
once
c o n n e c t i v i t y
i s
r e s t o r e d .
−[
]
8 . 2 .
Display
o n l i n e / o f f l i n e
s t a t u s .
‘ ‘ ‘
Understand
the
problem ,
by
c r e a t i n g
an
extremely
d e t a i l e d
step −by−s t e p
plan ,
where
each
s t e p
i s
long
( m u l t i p l e
s e n t e n c e s )
and
in
t o t a l
i n c l u d e s
every
s i n g l e
f e a t u r e
requirement
s p e c i f i e d
above ,
f e e l
f r e e
to
copy
d i r e c t l y
from
i t .
Use no more
than
10
s t e p s
in
the
plan .
Create
a d d i t i o n a l
t e s t s ,
checks
and
e v a l u a t i o n
a t
each
s t e p
when
a p p l i c a b l e
to
help make an
e x c e l l e n t
code
implementation ,
where
a l l
the
code
i s
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l .
Use
b e s t
so f t w ar e
design
p r a c t i c e s ,
and you can
output
l a r g e
amounts
of
code
a t
once .
Please
i n c l u d e
a
l a s t
s en t e n ce
to
c r e a t e
and
run
t e s t s
when implementing
or
w r i t i n g
code
in
t h a t
same
s t e p .
You w i l l
r e c e i v e
no human
i n p u t
a t
any
stage ,
so you
cannot
use a human to
t e s t .
Only
c r e a t e
a
d e t a i l e d
plan
to
begin
with ,
which
i n c l u d e s
d e s i g n i n g
and
running
t e s t s
to
check
t h a t
they
a l l
pass .
Please
be
sure
to
i n c l u d e
a l l
of
the
s p e c i f i e d
f e a t u r e
r e q u i r e m e n t s
in
the
f o l l o w i n g
plan .
[LLM RESPONSE MESSAGE]
53


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
[ Function
Call ] [ p r o v i d e _ d e t a i l e d _ s u b _ t a s k _ s t e p s _ f o r _ s u b _ a g e n t s ] {
" s t e p s " :
[
" Step
1:
S t a r t
by
s e t t i n g
up
the
b a s i c
s t r u c t u r e
of
the
a p p l i c a t i o n .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
the
main
a p p l i c a t i o n
f i l e
( app . py )
and
s e t t i n g
up a
Flask
a p p l i c a t i o n .
Also ,
c r e a t e
a mock d a t ab a s e
using
an in −memory
d i c t i o n a r y
to
s t o r e
user
data .
This
d i c t i o n a r y
should
be
able
to
s t o r e
user
i n f o r m a t i o n
such
as
email ,
password ,
p r o f i l e
p i c t u r e ,
s t a t u s
message ,
pr ivacy
s e t t i n g s ,
blocked
c o n t a c t s ,
and
groups .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
a p p l i c a t i o n
setup
i s
c o r r e c t
and
the mock d a t a ba s e
can
s t o r e
and
r e t r i e v e
data
c o r r e c t l y . " ,
" Step
2:
Implement
user
r e g i s t r a t i o n
and
a u t h e n t i c a t i o n .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
r o u t e s
f o r
user
sign
up and
f o r g o t t e n
password
recovery .
The
sign
up
r o u t e
should
accept
user
email
and password ,
and
s t o r e
t h i s
i n f o r m a t i o n
in
the mock d a ta b a s e .
The
f o r g o t t e n
password
recovery
r o u t e
should
accept
user
email
and
send a password
r e s e t
l i n k
( f o r
the
purpose
of
t h i s
task ,
j u s t
d i s p l a y
the
l i n k ) .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
r e g i s t r a t i o n
and
a u t h e n t i c a t i o n
r o u t e s
work as
expected . " ,
" Step
3:
Implement
user
p r o f i l e
management .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
r o u t e s
f o r
s e t t i n g
p r o f i l e
p i c t u r e s
and
s t a t u s
messages ,
and
updating
privac y
s e t t i n g s .
The
p r o f i l e
p i c t u r e
and
s t a t u s
message
r o u t e s
should
accept
the
r e s p e c t i v e
data
and
update
the
user ’ s
i n f o r m a t i o n
in
the mock da t a b as e .
The
pri vacy
s e t t i n g s
r o u t e
should
accept
the new
s e t t i n g s
and
update
the
user ’ s
i n f o r m a t i o n
in
the mock d a t a ba s e .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
p r o f i l e
management
r o u t e s
work as
expected . " ,
" Step
4:
Implement
c o n t a c t
management .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
r o u t e s
f o r
blocking / unblocking
c o n t a c t s
and managing
groups .
The
block / unblock
r o u t e s
should
accept
the
contact ’ s
email
and
update
the
user ’ s
blocked
c o n t a c t s
l i s t
in
the mock d a ta b a s e .
The group management
r o u t e s
should
accept
the
group
d e t a i l s
( name ,
p i c t u r e ,
p a r t i c i p a n t s )
and
update
the
user ’ s
groups
in
the mock d a t a ba s e .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
c o n t a c t
management
r o u t e s
work as
expected . " ,
" Step
5:
Implement
messaging .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
r o u t e s
f o r
sending
and
r e c e i v i n g
messages ,
updating
read
r e c e i p t s ,
e n c r y p t i n g
messages ,
and
s h a r i n g
images .
The send / r e c e i v e
r o u t e s
should
accept
the
message
data
and
update
the
r e s p e c t i v e
user ’ s
messages
in
the mock da t a b as e .
The read
r e c e i p t
r o u t e
should
accept
the
message ID and
update
the
message ’ s
read
s t a t u s
in
the mock d a t ab a s e .
The
e n c r y p t i o n
r o u t e
should
accept
the
message
data ,
encr ypt
i t ,
and
s t o r e
i t
in
the mock
d a ta b a se .
The image
s h a r i n g
r o u t e
should
accept
the
image
data
and
update
the
r e s p e c t i v e
user ’ s
messages
in
the mock
d a ta b a se .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
messaging
r o u t e s
work as
expected . " ,
" Step
6:
Implement
group
c h a t s .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
r o u t e s
f o r
c r e a t i n g
group
chats ,
adding / removing
p a r t i c i p a n t s ,
and
managing admin
r o l e s
and
p e r m i s s i o n s .
The
c r e a t e
group
chat
r o u t e
should
accept
the
group
d e t a i l s
( name ,
p i c t u r e ,
p a r t i c i p a n t s )
and
update
the
user ’ s
groups
in
the mock d a t ab a s e .
The add / remove
p a r t i c i p a n t s
r o u t e
should
accept
the
group ID and
p a r t i c i p a n t ’ s
email ,
and
update
the
group ’ s
p a r t i c i p a n t s
in
the mock d a t ab a s e .
The admin
r o l e s
and
p e r m i s s i o n s
r o u t e
should
accept
the
group ID ,
admin ’ s
email ,
and new permissions ,
and
update
the
group ’ s admin
p e r m i s s i o n s
in
the mock d a ta b a s e .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
group
chat
r o u t e s
work as
expected . " ,
" Step
7:
Implement
the
s t a t u s / s t o r y
f e a t u r e .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
r o u t e s
f o r
p o s t i n g
image
s t a t u s e s
and managing who can
see
the
s t a t u s .
The
post
s t a t u s
r o u t e
should
accept
the
image
data
and
update
the
user ’ s
s t a t u s e s
in
the mock d a t ab a s e .
The
manage
v i s i b i l i t y
r o u t e
should
accept
the
s t a t u s
ID and
v i s i b i l i t y
s e t t i n g s ,
and
update
the
s t a t u s ’ s
v i s i b i l i t y
in
the
mock d a t ab a s e .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
s t a t u s / s t o r y
r o u t e s
work as
expected . " ,
" Step
8:
Implement
the web
a p p l i c a t i o n .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
a
b a s i c HTML/ CSS / JS
f r o n t e n d
t h a t
i n t e r a c t s
with
the
Flask
backend .
The
f r o n t e n d
should
have
pages
f o r
sign up ,
sign
in ,
p r o f i l e
management ,
c o n t a c t
management ,
messaging ,
group
chats ,
and
s t a t u s / s t o r y .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
f r o n t e n d
can
s u c c e s s f u l l y
send
r e q u e s t s
to
the
backend and
d i s p l a y
the
r e t u r n e d
data . " ,
" Step
9:
Implement
c o n n e c t i v i t y
and
o f f l i n e
mode .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
a
r o u t e
f o r
updating
the
user ’ s
o n l i n e / o f f l i n e
s t a t u s ,
and a system
f o r
queuing
messages when the
user
i s
o f f l i n e .
The
o n l i n e / o f f l i n e
s t a t u s
r o u t e
should
accept
the
user ’ s
email
and new s t a t u s ,
and
update
the
user ’ s
s t a t u s
in
the mock da t a b as e .
The message
queuing
system
should
s t o r e
messages
in
a queue when the
user
i s
o f f l i n e ,
and
send them when the
user
comes
o n l i n e .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
c o n n e c t i v i t y
and
o f f l i n e
mode
f e a t u r e s
work as
expected . " ,
" Step
10:
F i n a l l y ,
perform
a
comprehensive
t e s t
of
the
e n t i r e
a p p l i c a t i o n .
This
i n c l u d e s
t e s t i n g
a l l
routes ,
the
frontend ,
and
the mock d a t a ba s e .
Fix
any bugs
t h a t
are
found ,
and
ensure
t h a t
a l l
t e s t s
pass .
Also ,
ensure
t h a t
the
a p p l i c a t i o n
meets
a l l
the
s p e c i f i e d
f e a t u r e
r e q u i r e m e n t s . "
]
}
Then the first instruction is loaded and is executed, for example,
[ System ]
O b j e c t i v e :
Write
code
f o r
a
l a r g e
system
design
t a s k .
Please
note
t h a t
the
code
should
be
f u l l y
f u n c t i o n a l . No p l a c e h o l d e r s .
Only use
the
f u n c t i o n s
you have
been
provided
with .
Only use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
to
output
code .
You must
a c t
autonomously
and you
w i l l
r e c e i v e
no human
i n p u t
a t
any
s t a g e . You have
to
r e t u r n
as
output
the
complete
code
f o r
completing
t h i s
task ,
and
c o r r e c t l y
i n c o r p o r a t e
i t
i n t o
the
e x i s t i n g
codebase .
You always
w r i t e
out
the
whole
f i l e
c o n t e n t s . You always
i n d e n t
code
with
t a b s .
Please
always
view
the
f i l e s
before
w r i t i n g
to
them ,
to make sure
you
are
w r i t i n g
to
the
c o r r e c t
f i l e s .
When w r i t i n g
a
t e s t ,
make the
filename
s t a r t
with
the
p r e f i x
’ t e s t _ ’ .
Provide
the
minimal
code
n e c e s s a r y
to
achieve
the
t a s k
c o n d i t i o n e d
on
the
e x i s t i n g
g e n e r a t e d
code −−−i n c l u d i n g
changing
the
e x i s t i n g
g e n e r a t e d
code .
You cannot
v i s u a l i z e
any
g r a p h i c a l
output . You
e x i s t
within
a Actor Model machine ,
and when you
l i s t
out
steps ,
each
s t e p
w i l l
be
taken
by a new
s e p a r a t e
sub −ChatGPT model . When you
l i s t
out
a sub −t a s k
steps ,
you can
o p t i o n a l l y
s p e c i f y
the
sub −t a s k
v a l i d a t i o n
to
check
t h a t
i t
has
been
completed
s u c c e s s f u l l y .
You cannot
use
any
d a t a b a s e s
as
none
are
setup
in
the
l o c a l
environment ,
i n s t e a d
mock a
d a ta b a s e
with
an
in memory
d i c t i o n a r y
to
s t o r e
data . No data
saved
to
disk
w i l l
p e r s i s t
between
s t e p s
or
w r i t e
o p e r a t i o n s .
I f
a
t e s t
i s
f a i l i n g
the
e r r o r
could
be
the
code ,
or
the
t e s t
i s
i n c o r r e c t ,
so
f e e l
f r e e
to
o v e r w r i t e
and change
the
t e s t s
when they
are
i n c o r r e c t ,
to make
a l l
t e s t s
pass .
Use
the
f u n c t i o n s
provided . When c a l l i n g
f u n c t i o n s
only
provide
a RFC8259 compliant JSON r e q u e s t
f o l l o w i n g
t h i s
format
without
d e v i a t i o n .
[CU]
O b j e c t i v e :
Execute
sub
t a s k
s t e p :
Step
1:
S t a r t
by
s e t t i n g
up
the
b a s i c
s t r u c t u r e
of
the
a p p l i c a t i o n .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
the
main
a p p l i c a t i o n
f i l e
( app . py )
and
s e t t i n g
up a
Flask
a p p l i c a t i o n .
Also ,
c r e a t e
a mock d a t a ba s e
using
an in −memory
d i c t i o n a r y
to
s t o r e
user
data .
This
d i c t i o n a r y
should
be
able
to
s t o r e
user
i n f o r m a t i o n
such
as
email ,
password ,
p r o f i l e
p i c t u r e ,
s t a t u s
message ,
p rivacy
s e t t i n g s ,
blocked
c o n t a c t s ,
and
groups .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
a p p l i c a t i o n
setup
i s
c o r r e c t
and
the mock d at a b a se
can
s t o r e
and
r e t r i e v e
data
c o r r e c t l y . .
Note :
Condition
any new code
f i l e s
on
the
e x i s t i n g
code
f i l e s :
[ ] .
Fully
implement
t h e s e
f e a t u r e s
in
the
code ,
no
p l a c e h o l d e r s . You
can now o p t i o n a l l y
view
the
e x i s t i n g
f i l e s
i f
you need
to
view them
to
complete
the
c u r r e n t
t a s k
s t e p . You have a
l i m i t e d
c o n t e x t
window so be
s e l e c t i v e
about
which
f i l e s
you view ,
only
view
the
f i l e s
you
t h i n k
you might
need
to
view .
Summary output
of
p re v io u s
s t e p :
" " " "
Respond now only
with
a
f u n c t i o n
c a l l
of
one
of
the
f o l l o w i n g
f u n c t i o n s
provided :
‘ sub_task_step_complete ‘ ,
‘ v i e w _ f i l e s ‘ ,
‘
ru n_p yt hon _fi le ‘ ,
‘ p y t e s t _ f i l e s ‘ ,
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘ ,
‘ d e l e t e _ f i l e s ‘ ,
and
i f
you want
to
output
code
only
use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
f u n c t i o n
to
output
code .
54


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
[LLM]
[ Function
Call ]
[ w r i t e _ f i l e s ] {
" f i l e s _ a n d _ c o n t e n t s " :
[
{
" f i l e _ p a t h " :
" app . py " ,
" f i l e _ c o n t e n t s " :
" from
f l a s k
import
Flask ,
r e q u e s t \ n \ napp = Flask ( __name__ ) \ n \ n# Mock d a t a ba s e \ nusers_db = {}\ n \ n@app . r o u t e ( ’ /
users ’ ,
methods =[ ’POST ’ ] ) \ ndef
c r e a t e _ u s e r ( ) : \ n \ t d a t a = r e q u e s t . g e t _ j s o n ( ) \ n \ t u s e r s _ d b [ data [ ’ email ’ ] ]
= data \ n \ t r e t u r n
{ ’ message ’ :
’ User
created ’} ,
201\ n \ n@app . r o u t e ( ’ / u s e r s / < email > ’ ,
methods =[ ’GET’ ] ) \ ndef
g e t _ u s e r ( email ) : \ n \ t u s e r =
users_db . get ( email ) \ n \ t i f
not
user : \ n \ t \ t r e t u r n
{ ’ message ’ :
’ User
not
found ’} ,
404\ n \ t r e t u r n
user ,
200"
} ,
{
" f i l e _ p a t h " :
" t e s t _ a p p . py " ,
" f i l e _ c o n t e n t s " :
" import
p y t e s t \ nimport
app \ n \ n@pytest . f i x t u r e \ n \ ndef
c l i e n t ( ) : \ n \ tapp . app . config [ ’TESTING ’ ] = True \ n \ t w i t h
app . app . t e s t _ c l i e n t ( )
as
c l i e n t : \ n \ t \ t y i e l d
c l i e n t \ n \ n \ ndef
t e s t _ c r e a t e _ a n d _ g e t _ u s e r ( c l i e n t ) : \ n \ t u s e r _ d a t a = {\ n \ t \ t ’
email ’ :
’ test@example . com ’ , \ n \ t \ t ’ password ’ :
’ password ’ , \ n \ t \ t ’ p r o f i l e _ p i c t u r e ’ :
’ p i c t u r e . jpg ’ , \ n \ t \ t ’ status_message ’ :
’ Hello ! ’ , \ n \ t \ t ’ p r i v a c y _ s e t t i n g s ’ :
’ public ’ , \ n \ t \ t ’ blocked_contacts ’ :
[ ] , \ n \ t \ t ’ groups ’ :
[ ] \ n \ t }\ n \ t r e s p o n s e =
c l i e n t .
post ( ’ / users ’ ,
json = u s e r _ d a t a ) \ n \ t a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 201\ n \ t a s s e r t
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
== { ’ message ’ :
’ User
created ’ } \ n \ n \ t r e s p o n s e =
c l i e n t . get ( ’ / u s e r s / test@example . com ’ ) \ n \ t a s s e r t
response . s t a t u s _ c o d e == 200\ n \ t a s s e r t
response . g e t _ j s o n ( )
== u s e r _ d a t a "
}
]
}
[CU]
[ Function ]
{" w r i t e _ f i l e s _ s t a t u s " :
" succ ess " ,
" message " :
" All
t e s t s
passed . " }
[CU]
Has
the
sub
t a s k
s t e p
been
completed
of :
‘ ‘ ‘
Step
1:
S t a r t
by
s e t t i n g
up
the
b a s i c
s t r u c t u r e
of
the
a p p l i c a t i o n .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
the
main
a p p l i c a t i o n
f i l e
( app . py )
and
s e t t i n g
up a
Flask
a p p l i c a t i o n .
Also ,
c r e a t e
a mock da t a b as e
using
an in −memory
d i c t i o n a r y
to
s t o r e
user
data .
This
d i c t i o n a r y
should
be
able
to
s t o r e
user
i n f o r m a t i o n
such
as
email ,
password ,
p r o f i l e
p i c t u r e ,
s t a t u s
message ,
pri vacy
s e t t i n g s ,
blocked
c o n t a c t s ,
and
groups .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
a p p l i c a t i o n
setup
i s
c o r r e c t
and
the mock d a t ab a s e
can
s t o r e
and
r e t r i e v e
data
c o r r e c t l y .
‘ ‘ ‘
I f
yes ,
c a l l
the
f u n c t i o n
‘ sub_task_step_complete ‘ ,
o t h e r w i s e
r e f l e c t
and
c o r r e c t
the
f u l l
code
to
complete
the
t a s k .
Only use
the
f u n c t i o n s
you have
been
provided
with ,
and
i f
you want
to
output
code
only
use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
f u n c t i o n
to
output
code .
Condition
i t
on
e x i s t i n g
code :
[ ’ app . py ’ ,
’ t e s t _ a p p . py ’ ]
Fully
implement
t h e s e
f e a t u r e s
in
the
code ,
no
p l a c e h o l d e r s .
I f
you
have
not
viewed
the
f i l e s
before
w r i t i n g
to
them ,
p l e a s e
view them ,
to make sure
you
are
w r i t i n g
to
the
c o r r e c t
f i l e s .
Respond now only
with
a
f u n c t i o n
c a l l
of
one
of
the
f o l l o w i n g
f u n c t i o n s
provided :
‘ sub_task_step_complete ‘ ,
‘ v i e w _ f i l e s ‘ ,
‘
ru n_p yt hon _fi le ‘ ,
‘ p y t e s t _ f i l e s ‘ ,
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘ ,
‘ d e l e t e _ f i l e s ‘ ,
and
i f
you want
to
output
code
only
use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
f u n c t i o n
to
output
code .
[LLM]
[ Function
Call ]
[ p y t e s t _ f i l e s ] {
" f i l e s _ t o _ t e s t " :
[ " t e s t _ a p p . py " ]
}
[CU]
[ Function ]
{" output " :
"=============================
t e s t
s e s s i o n
s t a r t s
==============================\ nplatform
l i n u x −−
Python
3 . 9 . 7 ,
p y t e s t −7 . 4 . 2 ,
pluggy −1 . 3 . 0 \ n r o o t d i r :
/ tmp / tmp0wam3ifj \ np lu g in s :
hydra −core −1 . 3 . 2 ,
anyio −3 . 7 . 0 \ n c o l l e c t e d
1 item
\ n \ n t e s t _ a p p . py
.
[100%]\ n \ n============================== 1
passed
in
0.04 s ===============================
I f
a
t e s t
i s
f a i l i n g
the
e r r o r
could
be
the
code ,
or
the
t e s t
i s
i n c o r r e c t ,
so
f e e l
f r e e
to
o v e r w r i t e
and change
the
t e s t s
when they
are
i n c o r r e c t ,
to make
a l l
t e s t s
pass . " }
[CU] Has
the
sub
t a s k
s t e p
been
completed
of :
‘ ‘ ‘
Step
1:
S t a r t
by
s e t t i n g
up
the
b a s i c
s t r u c t u r e
of
the
a p p l i c a t i o n .
This
i n c l u d e s
c r e a t i n g
the
main
a p p l i c a t i o n
f i l e
( app . py )
and
s e t t i n g
up a
Flask
a p p l i c a t i o n .
Also ,
c r e a t e
a mock da t a ba s e
using
an in −memory
d i c t i o n a r y
to
s t o r e
user
data .
This
d i c t i o n a r y
should
be
able
to
s t o r e
user
i n f o r m a t i o n
such
as
email ,
password ,
p r o f i l e
p i c t u r e ,
s t a t u s
message ,
pri vacy
s e t t i n g s ,
blocked
c o n t a c t s ,
and
groups .
Write
t e s t s
to
ensure
t h a t
the
a p p l i c a t i o n
setup
i s
c o r r e c t
and
the mock d a t ab a s e
can
s t o r e
and
r e t r i e v e
data
c o r r e c t l y .
‘ ‘ ‘
I f
yes ,
c a l l
the
f u n c t i o n
‘ sub_task_step_complete ‘ ,
o t h e r w i s e
r e f l e c t
and
c o r r e c t
the
f u l l
code
to
complete
the
t a s k .
Only use
the
f u n c t i o n s
you have
been
provided
with ,
and
i f
you want
to
output
code
only
use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
f u n c t i o n
to
output
code .
Condition
i t
on
e x i s t i n g
code :
[ ’ app . py ’ ,
’ t e s t _ a p p . py ’ ]
Fully
implement
t h e s e
f e a t u r e s
in
the
code ,
no
p l a c e h o l d e r s .
I f
you
have
not
viewed
the
f i l e s
before
w r i t i n g
to
them ,
p l e a s e
view them ,
to make sure
you
are
w r i t i n g
to
the
c o r r e c t
f i l e s .
Respond now only
with
a
f u n c t i o n
c a l l
of
one
of
the
f o l l o w i n g
f u n c t i o n s
provided :
‘ sub_task_step_complete ‘ ,
‘ v i e w _ f i l e s ‘ ,
‘
ru n_p yt hon _fi le ‘ ,
‘ p y t e s t _ f i l e s ‘ ,
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘ ,
‘ d e l e t e _ f i l e s ‘ ,
and
i f
you want
to
output
code
only
use
the
‘ w r i t e _ f i l e s ‘
f u n c t i o n
to
output
code .
[LLM]
[ Function
Call ]
[ sub_task_step_complete ]
{}
[CU]
Please
provide
a one
or two
se n t en c e
summary of
the
output
of
t h i s
step ,
which
i s
u s e f u l
f o r
the
next
s t e p .
Your
response
w i l l
be used when
s t a r t i n g
the
next
s t e p
without
any
of
the
p re v io u s
messages .
[LLM] The
b a s i c
s t r u c t u r e
of
the
a p p l i c a t i o n
has
been
s e t
up ,
i n c l u d i n g
the
main
a p p l i c a t i o n
f i l e
( app . py )
and a
Flask
a p p l i c a t i o n .
A mock d at a b a se
using
an in −memory
d i c t i o n a r y
has
been
c r e a t e d
to
s t o r e
user
data ,
and
t e s t s
have
been
w r i t t e n
and
passed
to
ensure
t h a t
the
a p p l i c a t i o n
setup
i s
c o r r e c t
and
the mock d at a b a se
can
s t o r e
and
r e t r i e v e
data
c o r r e c t l y .
The second instruction is loaded, and the process repeats.
H.5
ADDITIONAL DIVERSE PROGRAMMING CODE GENERATION TASKS
We extended the codebase generation system design benchmark with three new, additional diverse
programming code generation tasks. These are a recipe application, an event planner application, and
a financial tracking application. Each task consists of a user prompt of listed features to implement,
and Code-L2MAC produces the entire codebase from scratch. This is tabulated in Table 4.
We observe that Code-L2MAC continues to fully implement the highest percentage of user-specified
feature requirements across these new diverse tasks, while its code contains minimal syntactical
errors and passes a high number of unit tests—therefore, Code-L2MAC still achieves state-of-the-art
for completing these system design large code generation benchmark tasks. Moreover, we also
have implemented a new standard code quality metric of code coverage percentage of the unit tests
(Miller & Maloney, 1963), labelled Cov %, and similarly observe Code-L2MAC also has a high
code coverage percentage to its substantially larger amount of generated lines of code.
55


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 4: Codebase generation system design task results showing the percentage of functional features
specified that are fully implemented (Features %), the number of syntactical errors in the generated
code (# Errors), the number of lines of code (LOC), number of passing tests (Tests Passed), and the
unit test code coverage percentage (Cov %). Code-L2MAC fully implements the highest percentage
of user-specified feature requirements across all tasks by generating fully functional code that has
minimal syntactical errors and a high number of passing self-generated unit tests. The results are
averaged over 10 random seeds, with ± indicating 95% confidence intervals.
Recipe App
Event Planner App
Financial Tracking App
Method
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passeds
Cov %
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passed
Cov %
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passed
Cov %
↑
↓
↑
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
GPT4
21.6±2.12
0±0
107±6.62
3.15±0.38
97.5±0.376
9.2±0.853
0.025±0.0506
74.6±4.12
1.75±0.395
88.7±5.5
26.2±4.67
0.0513±0.104
80.5±8.52
2.13±0.422
93.1±3.17
CodeT
20.5±4.86
0±0
96.5±13.8
3.05±0.879
97.8±0.523
11.2±1.12
0.05±0.105
75.2±8.77
2.45±0.704
92.5±10.2
21.4±3.25
0±0
65.9±6.93
2.25±0.368
97.9±0.209
Self-Refine
26±3.45
0.1±0.209
149±27.4
2±1.97
76.2±7.83
14.5±2.94
0.15±0.171
118±20.1
3.9±1.9
76.7±15
23.6±2.45
0.25±0.299
87.2±8.24
0.55±0.514
76.7±9.97
Reflexion
19±3.36
0.25±0.299
95.9±14.5
2.95±0.852
89.9±10.4
10±1.5
0±0
82±10.5
3±0.774
95.1±4.35
22.5±3.12
0.2±0.419
86.8±13.7
2.7±0.745
92.8±8.73
AutoGPT
39.2±14.9
1.85±1.45
106±19.1
1.3±2.02
9.8±14.1
35.7±32.9
0±0
23.9±20.7
0±0
0±0
32.9±44.2
0±0
25±15.8
0±0
0±0
Code-L2MAC
82±7.1
0±0
497±40.7
24.6±2.7
94.2±2.87
83±2.96
0±0
473±39.3
25.6±3.04
97.1±1.02
62±13.1
0±0
307±84.5
12±4.19
90.5±6.69
H.6
HUMAN EXPERT VALIDATION OF FEATURES IMPLEMENTED PERCENTAGE METRIC
We hired two professional software engineers as human experts, separate from the authors of this
work, to perform code reviews of the generated codebases for each method against the user-requested
task feature checklist, counting only features that they verified are correctly and fully implemented.
We regard the resulting metric, labeled human expert features percentage Human Expert Features
%, as the ground truth.
We tabulate in Table 5 this metric below across three random seed runs. We highlight two conclusions.
Code-L2MAC significantly outperforms other baselines based on Human Expert Features %. The
human and LLM counterparts, Human Expert Features % and Features % strongly correlate
(ρ = 0.976), thereby establishing Features % as a good proxy for the ground truth. This validates
our usage of Features % as a scalable and cost-effective way to evaluate the number of features
implemented in codebases from new method-task pairs. This conclusion aligns with existing literature
on using LLMs as a proxy for human evaluators (Chiang & Lee, 2023).
Table 5: Codebase generation system design task results showing the percentage of functional
features specified that are fully implemented (Features %), and ground truth metric of human experts
counting the functional features specified that are fully implemeneted Human Expert Features %.
Code-L2MAC fully implements the highest percentage of user-specified feature requirements across
all tasks by generating fully functional code. The results are averaged over three random seeds.
URL Shortener App
Online Social Media App
Online Chat App
Method
Human Expert Features %
Features %
Human Expert Features %
Features %
Human Expert Features %
Features %
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
GPT4
31.4
53.6
11.1
19.5
10
11
AutoGPT
15.7
25.3
6.35
33.3
15
23.1
Code-L2MAC
78.4
91.6
61.9
82.4
60
59.4
H.7
CHALLENGES AND THE EVALUATION OF HUMAN-WRITTEN TEST-CASES
We also explored using a priori hand-written test cases that are consistent across the different methods.
We implemented this metric and present the results in Table 6 below, which shows it is correlated to
our proposed main evaluation metric of Features %.
It is relevant to discuss some challenges this approach presents:
• Hand written test cases assume and impose a known interface or a stringent imple-
mentation structure. In small code snippet tasks, such as those in HumanEval (Chen et al.,
2021) or MBPP (Austin et al., 2021), an explicitly defined function interface is explicitly
presented to the LLM, and the LLM only responds with the code for that function body.
In this situation handwritten test cases can assume the pre-defined implementation struc-
ture. However, in codebase generation tasks defined through feature requirements, there
is freedom about the segmentation into components, modules or classes which must be
appropriately determined by the code generation method. E.g., allowing a user to register an
account can be achieved with many different code implementations. By specifying tests, we
filter this ambiguity into a given implementation approach and we cannot account for all
other possible code implementation approaches to implement a functional feature correctly.
56


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
• Requires expert-crafted task-specific test cases a priori. This hinders the scalability of
this approach.
We added these hand written test cases into each method’s context window Ct throughout all stages
of generation. Once the method generated a codebase, we then randomly changed the hand-written
test case parameters to still be the same test, just with different test parameters, to avoid the method
memorizing the test examples, e.g. changing the initial user_ids to a random value. Since all methods
often generated a codebase that did not exactly match the implementation of the test-cases, while
still having a codebase that would conceptually pass the purpose of the test, we used GPT4 to port
the test cases to each specific codebase implementation. We term the proportion of such tests that
pass human-written tests as HT %, which is the percentage of human tests that pass for a given
codebase. As tabulated in Table 6, which is computed over 5 random seed runs, we observe that this
metric correlates to our Feature % evaluation metric (ρ = 0.695), which further provides empirical
evidence for such a metric.
It is important to point out that providing the test cases to the LLMs is not ideal since it hints at how
to design the implementation.
Table 6: Codebase generation system design task results showing the percentage of functional
features specified that are fully implemented (Features %), percentage of human written tests that
pass (HT %), the number of syntactical errors in the generated code (# Errors), the number of lines
of code (LOC), number of passing tests (Tests Passed) and the generated unit test code coverage
percentage (Cov %). Code-L2MAC fully implements the highest percentage of user-specified feature
requirements across the task by generating fully functional code that has minimal syntactical errors
and a high number of passing self-generated unit tests. The results are averaged over 5 random seeds,
with ± indicating 95% confidence intervals.
URL Shortener App
Method
Features %
HT %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passed
Cov %
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
GPT4
25±79.6
0±0
3.75±10.9
134±19.9
6.75±7.16
80.5±14.5
CodeT
13.2±42.1
11.1±35.4
0±0
126±14.4
7.75±3.98
86.8±4.57
Self-Refine
30.6±30.7
33.3±41.4
0.2±0.555
140±9.83
9±0
74.6±8.85
Reflexion
30.9±20.8
33.3±14.4
0±0
84.5±33.9
3.5±0.919
96.5±5.88
Code-L2MAC
76.5±33.3
41.7±54.7
0±0
286±172
10±9.09
83±8.72
Furthermore we also experimented with not including the hand written test cases in each method’s
context window throughout all stages of generation. If we otherwise follow the same setup as outlined
above, we observe the following results as tabulated in Table 7. We observe that the HT % metric
correlates to our Feature % evaluation metric (ρ = 0.928), which again further provide empirical
evidence for such a metric.
H.8
GENERATING 1,000+ LINES OF CODE WITH CODE-L2MAC
By removing the restrictions we imposed upon Code-L2MAC to economize api-calls, such as limiting
the amount of instructions to 10, we get a variation we term Code-L2MAC-Large that we tested
on the Online Chat application task where it reached reached over 1,000+ LOCs (5x the LOC of
AutoGPT, the next highest) as shown in Table 8 below.
H.9
CODE-L2MAC ABLATION WITH NO INSTRUCTION SUMMARIZATION MESSAGE
Code-L2MAC does not depend on the summary message Mrs from completing the previous in-
struction when loading a new instruction and can tackle each instruction from scratch, without
Mrs. Indeed, all the outputs regarding previously completed instructions are contained in the file
store/external memory and can be accessed on demand.
We empirically verify this by performing an ablation of Code-L2MAC that removes this summariza-
tion message step, without affecting the quality of the output code by much, as shown in Table 9.
57


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 7: Codebase generation system design task results showing the percentage of functional
features specified that are fully implemented (Features %), percentage of human written tests that
pass (HT %), the number of syntactical errors in the generated code (# Errors), the number of lines
of code (LOC), number of passing tests (Tests Passed) and the generated unit test code coverage
percentage (Cov %). Code-L2MAC fully implements the highest percentage of user-specified feature
requirements across the task by generating fully functional code that has minimal syntactical errors
and a high number of passing self-generated unit tests. The results are averaged over 5 random seeds,
with ± indicating 95% confidence intervals.
URL Shortener App
Method
Features %
HT %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passed
Cov %
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
GPT4
37.6±13.3
20±29.9
0±0
94.2±15.4
2±1.76
85.6±18.1
CodeT
47.1±10.3
42.2±31.5
0±0
98±19
4.8±3.45
91.8±7.15
Self-Refine
50.6±16.8
46.7±49.2
0±0
109±12.9
3.4±2.26
92±1.96
Reflexion
55.3±18.3
37.8±33.2
0.6±1.67
124±31.3
3.4±2.99
87.6±12.8
Code-L2MAC
89.4±12
71.1±50.3
0±0
283±100
8.6±9.52
77.2±53.7
Table 8: Codebase generation system design task results showing the percentage of functional features
specified that are fully implemented (Features %), the number of syntactical errors in the generated
code (# Errors), the number of lines of code (LOC), and number of passing tests (Tests Passed).
Code-L2MAC-Large can generate 1,000+ lines of code. The results are averaged over 10 random
seeds, with ± indicating 95% confidence intervals.
Online Chat App
Method
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passed
↑
↓
↑
Code-L2MAC-Large
53.3±19
0.333±1.43
1,030±40.8
5.67±13.7
We included this summarization message step to steer the LLM to find the correct files faster since
we expect more similarity and interdependence between contiguous instructions than between more
distant ones.
Table 9: Codebase generation system design task results showing the percentage of functional features
specified that are fully implemented (Features %), the number of syntactical errors in the generated
code (# Errors), the number of lines of code (LOC), and number of passing tests (Tests Passed).
The results are averaged over 10 random seeds, with ± indicating 95% confidence intervals.
URL Shortener App
Method
Features %
# Errors
LOC
Tests Passed
↑
↓
↑
Code-L2MAC (Ablation, without instruction output summarization)
89.4±9.88
0±0
274±43.3
8.2±3.12
Code-L2MAC
91.6±8.22
0±0
330±47.6
14±6.71
H.10
ADDITIONAL TASKS ON IMPLEMENTING A NEW FEATURE IN AN EXISTING LARGE
CODE BASE WITH CODE-L2MAC OF UP TO 165,000 LOCS
We added new three tasks of implementing a new feature in an existing large codebase with Code-
L2MAC, where each codebase has at least 87,000+ LOCs, and one task up to 165,000 LOCs. We
highlight that the task of taking an existing large codebase and implementing a new feature is common
in software engineering (Lee et al., 2002). These tasks involve the following three existing open
source codebases a of Dynamic Dashboard App (Tabor, 2023), Community Forum App (Justin, 2023)
and a Data Exploration App (Breddels, 2023). For each task, we take that existing codebase and
implement a new feature, which are a new button to delete all dashboards, a new front page statistic to
show the number of newly registered users within the last 30 days, and to show the current time on the
application banner, respectively. Unique to these new tasks is that instead of Code-L2MAC starting
58


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
from scratch, it starts with the existing codebase which it must correctly condition the generation of
new code on. The results are tabulated in Table 10.
We observe that Code-L2MAC can implement the feature, and still has a high feature implementation
percentage for these new feature implementation tasks, whilst working with a large codebase of up to
165,000 LOCs.
Table 10: Implementing a new feature in an existing large codebase task results showing the percent-
age of the runs that implemented the feature as specified that are fully implemented (Feature %)
and the number of lines of code (LOC). Code-L2MAC can implement the feature whilst working
with a large codebase up to 165,000 LOCs. The results are averaged over 10 random seeds, with ±
indicating 95% confidence intervals.
Dynamic Dashboard App
Community Forum App
Data Exploration App
Method
Features %
LOC
Features %
LOC
Features %
LOC
↑
↑
↑
Code-L2MAC
80±30.2
165,811.6±43.8
70±34.6
88,878.4±9.68
100±0
87,044.5±18.5
I
FUTURE WORK
We envision the possible exciting future directions for future work.
1. Error Checking. More advanced error checking, checking the output of the LLM to control
for hallucinations, and to prematurely avoid out-of-context errors—through the potential
adoption of backpressure techniques, as employed in existing message-based networking
systems (Tassiulas & Ephremides, 1990). Furthermore, a possible future direction to control
the generation of correct code is to use further tools to run and verify the code, for example,
a static code linter (to pick up initial syntax or similar errors) as feedback when the code has
been generated for a sub-task instruction.
2. Recursive planning and Reprogramming. Another possible way to avoid out-of-context
errors is to enable recursive planning of instruction into smaller sub-instructions and modify
existing stored prompt program instructions I to include these. In addition, future work
could explore the possibility of replacing the sub-steps altogether if the original instructions
prove to be an ineffective plan. This could involve some reflection of the reason that rendered
the current plan ineffective. Furthermore, replanning or reprorgramming could also be seen
as replacing the sub-steps altogether, however the degree to which (percentage) the original
prompt program instructions I that are re-programmed is an exciting future work direction.
3. Multi-processing with a prompt-program. Investigating and supporting multi-processing
program flow patterns, where we execute and have access to two or more LLMs to use, and
similarly with the associated tools as well.
4. Support for comprehensive control flow (code flow) paradigms: Investigating and
supporting a wider range of control flow (code flow) paradigms, encompassing constructs
like ‘while‘ loops, ‘switch‘ statements, ‘if‘ statements, as well as advanced patterns such as
asynchronous and coroutine patterns.
5. Optimize the expected subtask length of a sub-task. Given LLMs struggle with longer
context windows (Liu et al., 2023a), perhaps better overall task performance can be achieved
by reducing the average sub-task context length, of which there could be an optimum.
Furthermore, there exists a further tradeoff with a smaller context window to optimize
performance of both the overall task output performance and the compute performance of
the LLM.
6. LLM may only be able to solve tasks that can be expressed in natural language (text)
that it has been trained on. To complete tasks that it has not been trained on, such as
implementing a new application in a new programming language, it may need to be further
trained by fine-tuning related examples. This may also apply to the use of specialized tools
as well, such as the use of special optimization tools, to leverage when planning how to
decompose a task into sub-tasks.
59


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
7. Generating prompt-programs with human machine collaboration. Unique to prompt
programs is that they are naturally human-readable, allowing a human to inspect them
and interpret them, of which the human may make changes to the prompt program I, by
modifying or adding new parts to it. Furthermore, the architecture can also incorporate
human input as a tool to decide the next control flow of the prompt program and or use that
as part of the state to execute a sub-task instruction.
8. Interpretable operation for safety-critical applications. The entire process and flow of
operation is implemented as natural language, allowing humans to inspect the operation and
be interpretable to a human. This allows the operations to be debuggable and potentially
reason about corner case states in the operation of such a prompt program.
9. Building up semantic knowledge. For example, building up a detailed, up-to-date live
semantic knowledge of the large codebase—detailing how it works and what components do
what. This semantic knowledge of how the codebase is structured could then be leveraged
when completing a new sub-task instruction to have minimal additional read operations and
can be further updated when the sub-task is complete, persisting this semantic knowledge of
the generated code.
10. More tools and varied formats of memory Depending on the domain of the task, we
could include more tools, such as the ones described in (Schick et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2023).
Furthermore, the memory could hold other forms of information, such as images or speech,
and LL2MAC could still interact with such information through image2text, text2image,
image2image (or the parallel ones for audio and any other form of information).
11. Specialized LLM agents. We could consider having specialized LLM processors, each
tuned for a different task such as planning, coding, summarizing, writing tests, etc. Then,
the CU would choose which to instantiate at each step depending on the current goal.
12. Other methods for reading. It is worth investigating the impact on the performance of
using other reading methods such as the common embedding k-NN (Borgeaud et al., 2022).
13. Scalability and deployability. Future work could investigate the token efficiency of
execution. That is, minimizing the total number of tokens generated for task completion. A
first effort could investigate fine-tuning an LLM to write code in the form of diffs instead
of overwriting full files or making more fine-grained reads of files (sometimes, instead of
reading the whole implementation, it could be enough to only read function and class names
and possibly their descriptions).
14. Implementation optimization. There are two inherent limitations to the length of the
generated code files in the current implementation of Code-L2MAC. Both can be readily
addressed, providing fertile ground for future work. These are:
• Reading a file involves outputting all its content into the LLM’s context and writing a
file implies rewriting it. This means that to avoid falling out of context, the maximum
length for a file is the LLM context window, but, in fact, it is undesirable to have a file
of length more than half the LLM’s context window, since this will imply that the LLM
cannot modify it without falling out of context. This limitation can be overcome by
endowing the LLM with the capacity to selectively read and write parts of the file (e.g.,
function names and headers) in the same spirit as diffs are conducted in git. This is in
line with the previous item on “Scalability and deployability”.
• All the code file paths are listed in the context window Ct. Therefore, the maximum
number of file paths (for example, [’app.py,’ ’test_app.py’, ’...]) listed in Code-L2MAC
can have in memory is strictly less than the context length. This can be readily solved
by allowing the LLM only to list the file paths inside a folder and the possibility to
navigate inside a sub-folder. In such a case, the constraint would happen only regarding
the degree in the file tree, but we could theoretically have infinite depth in the file store.
15. Improving Code-L2MAC’s outputs’ efficiency. It is straightforward to measure efficiency.
The runtime computational and memory complexity of a test could be provided as feedback
to the LLM, which could use this measure to reflect upon the efficiency of the current
implementation and optimize it if necessary.
60


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
I.1
L2MAC IN NON-CODING DOMAINS
The general-purpose property of stored-program computers and the motivation of L2MAC in such a
framework suggest that L2MAC could inherit this general purpose.
First, it should be noted that the coding tasks cover a broad set of impactful applications, which,
combined with our empirical results, suggests that L2MAC might encompass wide applicability.
Apart from that, we can consider other applications for this framework. As discussed in Section 3.1,
a crucial consideration for L2MAC is the acknowledgment that LLMs are imperfect. Thus, the
evaluation tools for instantiating L2MAC play an important role in its effectiveness (note that this
role could become less and less crucial as LLMs progress). Consequently, additional applications
that would render most immediate for the usage of this framework are the ones for which we have
effective evaluation tools or where there is a less stringent requirement on the output structure. This
might include AutoML, generating mathematical proofs (Li et al., 2021), or writing long textual
documents; the first two have natural or existing verification tools (Bayer et al., 2022); the latter
imposes less strict requirements, where an LLM could also be used as an evaluator.
The materialization of experiments on these tasks is beyond the scope of this paper; however, each of
these poses exciting directions for future work.
61