RoboCodeX: Multimodal Code Generation for Robotic Behavior Synthesis
Yao Mu12†, Junting Chen23, Qinglong Zhang2, Shoufa Chen1, Qiaojun Yu4, Chongjian Ge1, Runjian Chen1,
Zhixuan Liang1, Mengkang Hu1, Chaofan Tao1, Peize Sun1, Haibao Yu1, Chao Yang2, Wenqi Shao2,
Wenhai Wang5, Jifeng Dai2,6, Yu Qiao2, Mingyu Ding7∗, Ping Luo1,2∗
1The University of Hong Kong,
2OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
3ETH Zurich
4Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5The Chinese University of Hong Kong
6Tsinghua University
7UC Berkely
https://sites.google.com/view/robocodexplus
Talk is cheap. Show me the code.
— Linus Torvalds
Abstract
Robotic behavior synthesis, the problem of un-
derstanding multimodal inputs and generating
precise physical control for robots, is an impor-
tant part of Embodied AI. Despite successes in
applying multimodal large language models for
high-level understanding, it remains challenging
to translate these conceptual understandings into
detailed robotic actions while achieving general-
ization across various scenarios. In this paper, we
propose a tree-structured multimodal code gen-
eration framework for generalized robotic behav-
ior synthesis, termed RoboCodeX. RoboCodeX
decomposes high-level human instructions into
multiple object-centric manipulation units con-
sisting of physical preferences such as affordance
and safety constraints, and applies code gener-
ation to introduce generalization ability across
various robotics platforms. To further enhance
the capability to map conceptual and perceptual
understanding into control commands, a special-
ized multimodal reasoning dataset is collected for
pre-training and an iterative self-updating method-
ology is introduced for supervised fine-tuning. Ex-
tensive experiments demonstrate that RoboCodeX
achieves state-of-the-art performance in both sim-
ulators and real robots on four different kinds of
manipulation tasks and one navigation task.
1. Introduction
Embodied AI equips intelligent agents, such as robots,
with the capacity for perception, reasoning, and interac-
tion within the 3D physical world and with humans. Yet,
† Project lead. * Corresponding authors.
Grasp
Proposals
Object (apple)
Part 
(handle)
Code for Motion Planning
Object (drawer)
Code for Motion Planning
Scene Understanding
Chain of Code with Multi-modal Input
Observations
“Place the apple
into the drawer”
Human command
RoboCodeX
Grasp
Proposals
Physical
Constrains
Keep the center 
of mass within 
the gripper
Preference
Grab at central 
to prevent 
sphere rolling
Physical
Constrains
Operations must 
occur along a 
fixed axis
Preference
Move 
horizontally 
along the x-axis
Physical Constrains
Grasp Proposals
Preference
Figure 1. An illustration of our RoboCodeX
, a large vision lan-
guage model with tree-of-thought reasoning capabilities for robotic
code generation. It decomposes high-level human instructions into
multiple object-focused manipulation subtasks, further expand-
ing them by predicting physical constraints, preferential rankings,
and target position proposals. RoboCodeX acts as an interface to
translate high-level semantic understanding of the observed envi-
ronment and instructions into tailored robotic behaviors.
a central challenge lies in the generalizability of robotic
manipulation frameworks. On one hand, robot policies may
struggle to generalize to objects with diverse properties and
mechanisms, e.g., objects with different physical constraints
and grasping preferences in Figure. 1. On the other hand,
adapting a robot learning framework to different robotic
platforms encounters difficulties. These challenges stem
from the gap between the high-level scene understanding
and the low-level manipulation and control policies. How to
create a general framework with reasoning capabilities that
1
arXiv:2402.16117v1  [cs.RO]  25 Feb 2024


can map the high-level semantic understanding to generic
robotics behaviors, thus becomes a primary concern.
Previous methods (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023b;
Rana et al., 2023) leverage the reasoning capabilities of
Large Language Models (LLMs) to propose step-by-step
natural language plans for robot execution. However, lack-
ing environmental information (e.g., status and shape of
objects from vision) as contextual grounding, it is difficult
to leverage LLMs for decision-making within a given real-
world context. Consequently, they rely heavily on low-level
skill models (Brohan et al., 2022; 2023) to convert visual
observations and language commands into low-level actions.
Nonetheless, such skill models still struggle to generalize to
novel scenarios or robotic platforms, which requires precise
tuning of action sequences tailored to the robot’s morphol-
ogy and actuators.
Specifically, robotic skills and low-level behaviors for dif-
ferent tasks encompass these precise action sequences that
fulfill proper contact points, grasping poses, physical con-
straints, waypoints, and movement paths. Though previous
methods (Gao et al., 2023; Mirjalili et al., 2023; Agrawal
et al., 2023; Mo et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2022; Eisner et al.,
2022; Zhong et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023d) have explored
estimating manipulation preferences, such as grasp regions
of an object (Mirjalili et al., 2023) and contact points (Li
et al., 2023d), their focuses are mainly on specific tasks and
objects. Coordinating and generalizing such modules to
diverse common tasks, such as multiple object interactions
in complex environments, remains a significant challenge.
Recently, the rapid advancement of Multimodal Large Lan-
guage Models (MLLMs) (Li et al., 2022a; Alayrac et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2023c;e), such as GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023b),
have demonstrated strong aptitude in scene comprehension,
understanding of objects’ characteristics, and generalization
capabilities across diverse scenes and objects. This sug-
gests that leveraging their cognitive strengths by establish-
ing connections to physical world interactions could enable
more efficient intelligent system design. Additionally, while
MLLMs excel at high-level scene understanding, robotic
systems specialize in precise trajectory planning and execu-
tion. This implies that code could act as a symbolic bridge
between conceptual knowledge and low-level behaviors for
robots. Such connections would enable the integration of
MLLMs’ advanced cognitive processing with the nuanced
requirements of robotic control and planning, potentially
leading to more foundational and adaptable cross-platform
robotic systems.
Inspired by the above observations, in this paper, we pro-
pose a large vision language model for robotic code genera-
tion, named RoboCodeX, to serve as an interface between
MLLMs and robotic control systems, translating high-level
semantics and physical preference into corresponding low-
level motions tailored to a robot’s mechanics. Critically,
representing these plans and preferences in code enables
sharing and transfer across morphologically distinct robots.
Specifically, RoboCodeX comprehends diverse sensory in-
puts like vision, depth data, and human instructions, and em-
ploys a tree-of-thought structure that decomposes high-level
human instructions into several object-centric manipulation
units defined through textual code annotations. Each unit
acts as a node, further broken down into several key compo-
nents: 1) Target pose proposals generation through detailed
3D spatial analysis of objects within their environments.
2) Object physical characteristic prediction with visual in-
spiration and 3D geometry information such as translation
or rotation axis constraints on articulated objects, ensur-
ing the generation of realistic and feasible motion plans.
3) Preference prediction with the multimodal understand-
ing of environmental and task objectives, selecting optimal
gripping positions and approach directions. 4) Trajectory
generation leverages the planning algorithm to produce safe,
optimized, and compliant motion plans to respect collision
and physical constraints. With the seamlessly integrated key
capabilities, RoboCodeX performs complex manipulation
tasks flexibly in cluttered physical environments based on
high-level commands.
Training an MLLM with such reasoning capacity for phys-
ical robotic preferences and robotic behavior in codes re-
mains a challenge, which is often underrepresented in stan-
dard pretraining datasets primarily focusing on high-level
visual and language alignment. Meanwhile, research on
reasoning by fusing information from multiple sources is
seldom explored. To address this gap, we construct a multi-
modal reasoning dataset for pretraining by generating sim-
ulated environments with diverse tasks and corresponding
executable codes for each task. For the supervised fine-
tuning (SFT) stage, we generate high-quality data and code
with high success rate via an iterative self-updating frame-
work. The key contributions of this work are as follows:
• We introduce RoboCodeX, a large vision language model
with tree-of-thought reasoning capabilities for robotic
code generation. It predicts physical constraints, preferen-
tial rankings, and target position proposals while serving
as an interface between high-level conceptual knowledge
and low-level robotic behaviors.
• We present a specialized multimodal reasoning dataset
and an iterative self-updating methodology for supervised
fine-tuning to enhance RoboCodeX’s capacity for translat-
ing semantics and physical preferences into robot-specific
motions.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art per-
formance of RoboCodeX in both simulated and real robot
systems across four different kinds of manipulation tasks,
e.g., 17% success rate improvement over GPT-4V, and
competitive performance on embodied navigation tasks.
2


2. Related Works
Code Generation for Robotic Control. Recent advances
have explored utilizing natural language models for robotic
behavior synthesis. ProgPrompt (Singh et al., 2023) in-
troduced in the context of virtual environments, leverages
natural language models to generate action sequences in Vir-
tualHome (Puig et al., 2018), enabling intuitive and manage-
able robot behavior synthesis tailored for domestic settings.
Building upon this, Code-as-Policies (Liang et al., 2023) in-
vestigates composing full policy code for manipulation and
navigation tasks by emphasizing few-shot prompting and
hierarchical code generation. This work incorporates modu-
lar structures for reasoning and control into the generated
programs. Further developments by (Vemprala et al., 2023)
focus these techniques on real robotic systems. By mapping
high-level functions to diverse atomic tasks, they rapidly
adapt capabilities across robotic form factors while generat-
ing tailored executable code. However, these methods rely
solely on linguistic inputs, lacking multimodal grounding
to map visual observations to behaviors. Different from
previous works, this paper achieves visually-grounded code
synthesis to generate behaviors specialized to perceived
object characteristics.
Embodied AI with Large Foundation Models. Lever-
aging large pre-trained models shows promise for creat-
ing capable embodied agents. Many works focus on using
language models for planning and reasoning in embodied
agents (Huang et al., 2022a; Ahn et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2023a; Singh et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023a; Raman et al.,
2022; Song et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023a; Hu et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023a; Vemprala et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2023;
Driess et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023b; Wang
et al., 2023a; Radford et al., 2019; Padalkar et al., 2023). To
enable language models to perceive physical environments,
common approaches include providing textual descriptions
of scenes (Huang et al., 2022b; Zeng et al., 2022; Singh
et al., 2023) or access to perception APIs (Liang et al.,
2023). Vision can also be incorporated by decoding with
visual context (Huang et al., 2023b) or using multi-modal
language models that directly take visual input (Driess et al.,
2023; OpenAI, 2023a; Mu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023a).
Several researchers further adapt visual models to the em-
bodied perspective under egocentric conditions (Nair et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2018) and build datasets for bridging the
asynchronous egocentric and third-person view of human
activities in the real world (Grauman et al., 2022; Huang
et al., 2023c). However, perception alone is not enough for
embodied agents - they must also know how to act. This is
often achieved by providing pre-defined action primitives
that the model can invoke. As shown in (Liang et al., 2023),
LLMs can exhibit useful behavioral common sense for low-
level control policies, in addition to high-level reasoning
and planning capabilities. However, effectively connecting
perception, reasoning, and grounded action primitives re-
mains an open challenge. Unlike previous approaches that
use separate pipelines for vision and language or only focus
on high-level planning, our proposed method bridges the
gap between the cognitive abilities of a large end-to-end
multi-modal model and precise robotic planning through
code generation. This approach allows the model to make
multi-modal predictions, expanding each code node with
information about target positions, physical properties, pref-
erential rankings, and feasible trajectories.
Multimodal Large Language Models. Recent advance-
ments have seen the creation of multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) (Zhang et al., 2023c;b;d; Wu et al., 2023a;
Sun et al., 2023; Alayrac et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023b; Li
et al., 2023c; Lai et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023b; Chen
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2023a; Li et al.,
2023e; Ye et al., 2023), which aim to enhance LLM with
the capability to process and interpret visual information.
Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) uses the visual and lan-
guage inputs as prompts and shows remarkable few-shot
performance for visual question answering. Subsequently,
LLaVA series (Liu et al., 2023d; Lu et al., 2023a; Liu et al.,
2023c) and MiniGPT-4 (Zhu et al., 2023a) have brought
in visual instruction tuning, to improve the instruction-
following ability of MLLMs. Concurrently, models such
as VisionLLM (Wang et al., 2023b), KOSMOS-2 (Peng
et al., 2023), and Qwen-VL (Bai et al., 2023), along with
other works (Wang et al., 2023c; Chen et al., 2023b) have
improved MLLMs with visual grounding capabilities, fa-
cilitating tasks such as region description and localization.
However, despite the considerable achievements of MLLMs,
their multimodal reasoning capabilities in complex robotic
behavior synthesizing remain under-explored.
3. Methods
We propose a multi-modal code generation framework that
utilizes a tree-of-thought architecture to decompose instruc-
tions into code units expanded through multi-modal pre-
dictions. To enhance the reasoning ability of the MLLMs,
we develop a specialized dataset and an iterative, specially
designed fine-tuning methodology. We evaluate this frame-
work with different preferences. Furthermore, we integrate
a vision adapter into the vision-language model to facilitate
multi-scale visual feature integration and bridge cognitive
perceptions with robotic planning.
3.1. Problem Setup
We consider a long-term manipulation problem as a high-
level free-form human instruction Lglobal (e.g., “clean the
table”). The observation contains the RGBD data I from
three different views of the depth camera (left, right, top).
Since it is hard to generate the whole trajectories directly for
3


Pose
Preference:
The
banana
has
long-axis
parallel
to
the
table
surface,
the
gripper
approach
direction
should
be
aligned
with
table
surface
normal.
Since
it
is
a
solid
object, the optimal position is its center
Preference
Pose proposals
Physical Characteristic
Pose proposals
Physical constrains
Motion
Preference:
it
can
only
move in
prismatic joint axis direction
Pose
Preference:
Considering
the
drawer
can
only be moved in prismatic direction, preferred
approach
direction
should
be
the
prismatic
joint axis of the drawer. The optimal position
is the center drawer’s handle.
Preference
Trajectory optimizer
Trajectory optimizer
Human: Can you help me place
the banana into the drawer?
Drawer-centric Unit
Banana-centric Unit
Observation
Human Instruction
### Drawer-centric Unit
drawer_handle_position = get_object_center_position(drawer_handle_name)
# Get the drawer prismatic joint closest to the handle position
drawer_joint_info = get_object_joint_info(obj_name='drawer', position=drawer_
handle_position, type="prismatic")
drawer_joint_position = drawer_joint_info["joint_position"]
drawer_joint_axis = drawer_joint_info["joint_axis"]
# Grasp the drawer handle with position and joint axis preferences
open_gripper()
grasp_pose = parse_adaptive_shape_grasp_pose(object_name=drawer_handle_name,
preferred_position=drawer_handle_position, preferred_approach_direction=drawe
r_joint_axis)
grasp(grasp_pose)
close_gripper()
attach_object(drawer_handle_name)
# Pull the drawer handle, move in prismatic joint axis direction
direction = drawer_joint_axis
move_in_direction(direction, distance=0.2)
# Release the drawer handle
open_gripper()
detach_object(drawer_handle_name)
# Redetect after manipulation unit
detect_objects(['banana','drawer','table'])
### Banana-centric Unit
#The banana‘s long-axis
lying on the table surface, so
gripper 
approach direction should be aligned with table surface normal.
table_normal = get_plane_normal('table')
open_gripper()
grasp_banana_pose = parse_adaptive_shape_grasp_pose(object_name='banana', pre
ferred_position=get_object_center_position('banana'), preferred_approach_dire
ction=table_normal)
grasp(grasp_banana_pose)
# Move the banana to the drawer
place_pose = parse_place_pose(‘banana', 'drawer’)
move_to_pose(place_pose)
# Release the banana
detach_object('banana')
Code Generation
Motion
Preference:
Single
object
has
no
motion limits
Figure 2. Example of robotic behavior synthesis with RoboCodeX. To accomplish the task “Place the banana into the drawer,” we first
decompose the whole task into a Drawer-centric Unit and a Banana-centric Unit. In the Drawer-centric Unit, the robot is programmed to
understand that it must align its gripper with the prismatic joint axis of the drawer, which is the optimal position for movement, considering
the drawer’s physical limits and trajectory optimization. Conversely, the Banana-centric Unit requires the robot to align its gripper with the
table surface normal and close to its center to pick up a banana. The accompanying code generation segment translates these multimodal
considerations into executable instructions. For the drawer, the code includes determining the handle’s position, executing the grip and
pull actions in line with the drawer’s joint axis, and then releasing the handle. For the banana, the code sequences involve aligning the
gripper, grasping the banana, moving it to the drawer, and detaching it at the destination.
long-term high-level instructions, we use a tree-of-thought
method via the visual reasoning of MLLMs to decompose
the entire task into several object-centric individual units
Utask →(u1, u2, . . . , un). The central problem investi-
gated in this work is how to generate a motion trajectory
set {τi}n
i=0. We represent τi as a sequence of dense end-
effector waypoints to be executed by an Operational Space
Controller (Khatib, 1987), where each waypoint consists
of a desired 6-DoF end-effector pose, end-effector velocity,
and gripper action. Given the i-th sub-task described by
ground-truth instruction ℓ∗
i , we formulate an optimization
problem defined as follows:
min
τi
N
X
i=0
{Stask (τi, ℓ∗
i ) + Scontrol (τi)}
s.t.
C(τi),
(1)
where Stask scores the extent to which τi completes the in-
struction ℓi, while Scontrol specifies the control costs, e.g.,
the cost to encourage τi to minimize total control effort or
total time. C(τi) denotes the dynamics and kinematics con-
straints. By solving this optimization for each sub-task ℓi,
we obtain a sequence of robot trajectories that collectively
fulfill the overall task specified by the instruction Lglobal.
3.2. Multi-modal Tree-of-thought Code Generation
We present a novel framework for synthesizing robotic be-
havior, integrating multi-perspective 3D perception, multi-
modal chain-of-code reasoning, and motion planning for the
execution of complex real-world tasks. The process begins
by capturing observations I, comprising 3 RGBD frames
from 3 different views. This approach helps avoid occlusion
issues caused by a single viewpoint and provides compre-
hensive 3D information. These are fused into a unified
3D spatial representation, i.e., a Truncated Signed Distance
Field (TSDF), encoding precise environmental structure.
Concurrently, the RGB images from three views are fed as
inputs into the RoboCodeX model together with the nat-
ural language instructions. RoboCodeX employs a tree-
of-thought architecture centered around semantic parsing,
contextual grounding, and goal-oriented partitioning. Such
visual reasoning directly connects visual features to an un-
derstanding of interaction preferences and physical con-
straints on objects. The overall task is decomposed into
sequential object-centric units as demonstrated in Equation
(2) with the language description of the sub-task Li and the
manipulation preference pfi which indicates the approach
4


directions or preferred touching positions considering the
control stability. For example, spherical objects should be
grasped from the center for stability, while open containers
like cups are better grasped at the edge for flexible control.
Lunits , pfunits = f (I, Lglobal )
Lunits = {L0, L1, . . . , LN}
pfunits = {pf0, pf1, . . . , pfN} .
(2)
For each object-centric unit, the grounded 2D positions de-
rived from RGB streams are matched with 3D boxes from
the point cloud, based on overlap and orientation consis-
tency. This process enables the extraction of an accurate 3D
point cloud, denoted as Oi for the task-relevant object. Sub-
sequently, the object-centric trajectory generation problem,
conditioned on the language instruction of the sub-task Li
can be formulated as,
τi = g (Oi, Li, pfi) ,
(3)
where τi is the motion trajectory of the i-th sub-task gen-
erated by the function g(·) with the preference pfi and lan-
guage instruction Li for the i-th task. It contains a sequence
of dense end-effector waypoints to be executed and discrete
control instructions for gripper opening and closing.
Then the aggregated object-specific perceptual inferences,
physical insights, and manipulation parameters are systemat-
ically compiled into structured executable action code. Each
unit is considered as a parent node and is further expanded to
i) part-level affordance Ai = h(Oi, Li) prediction, which
is the task-relevant part point cloud segmentation, such as
the handle’s area of the drawer; ii) grasp pose proposals pci
prediction, pci = {pci0, . . . , pcij, . . . , pcik} = cand (Ai).
Function cand(·) is a mapping N3 →SE(3) to gener-
ates SE(3) poses. Specifically, we use pre-trained Any-
Grasp (Fang et al., 2023) to generate the grasp pose pro-
posals, which provide abundant candidates with scores (see
details in Appendix D). We select the top 10 candidates as
grasp pose proposals and use the preferences inferred by
visual reasoning to select the optimal one, with considera-
tion of the object’s shape, prior knowledge, and the adja-
cent robot manipulation cells that will be performed. This
leverages AnyGrasp’s ability to produce diverse candidates
while allowing task-specific selection via visual reasoning
to pick high-quality ones; iii) object physical property pre-
diction ϕi = {ϕi0, . . . , ϕij, . . . , ϕik} = z(Oi, Li) such as
the joints information of the articulated objects. Specifically,
we use the GAMMA (Yu et al., 2023b) model to predict the
physical properties of articulated objects, which segments
an articulated object point cloud into rigid parts and esti-
mates articulation parameters. GAMMA extracts point-wise
features using PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017) which are then
processed for segmentation, part offset, and joint axis regres-
sion (see details in Appendix C). We also encapsulate the
plane detection functions in Open3D (Zhou et al., 2018) into
an API for calling during code generation, taking the ob-
ject’s point cloud as input and outputting the detected planes
as well as normal vector information; and iv) trajectory
planning: By integrating motion planning algorithms and
the Robot Operating System (ROS) manipulation modules,
the model finally outputs dynamically feasible robot trajec-
tories with assurances of collision avoidance and singularity
exclusion.
τi = Z(pci, ϕi, pfi, Li).
(4)
Specifically, we employ zeroth-order optimization in tra-
jectory planning by randomly sampling trajectories and
evaluating them with Scontrol and the constraint from the
occupancy map (see example in Appendix Figure 9).
3.3. Dataset Preparation
Pre-training Dataset. Most multi-modal models currently
focus on aligning different modalities, leaving a research
gap in complex reasoning with information from multiple
sources. To address this, we develop a diverse robotic multi-
modal code generation dataset with the help of GPT-4. To
ensure the diversity of the dataset, we design a procedu-
ral data generation framework. We first randomly sample
household scenes from the HM3D dataset (Ramakrishnan
et al., 2021), which provides various indoor scenes like bed-
rooms, living rooms, and kitchens as the base environments.
We then insert additional objects into semantically appro-
priate locations in the scenes—for example, placing objects
on top of tables and counters. The inserted objects are of
two types: independent objects like balls, toys, and fruits;
and container objects like bowls, plates, and cups that can
hold other objects. The objects are sampled from Google
Scan Dataset (Downs et al., 2022), YCB Dataset (Calli et al.,
2015), OmniObject3D Dataset (Wu et al., 2023b), and articu-
lated object dataset AKB-48(Liu et al., 2022). By randomly
selecting object categories and quantities and populating
the scenes accordingly, complex scene configurations are
obtained. Built upon the resulting environments, we form
natural language descriptions which are inputted into the
GPT-4 language model to produce free-form task descrip-
tions suitable for the given scene configurations, specifying
goals like object manipulation and rearrangement.
Note that since we can obtain all the information from the
simulator and render the observation from any view, we can
use GPT-4 to generate data rather than GPT-4V, which is
more expensive for large-scale data generation. Finally, for
each generated task, programming codes that accomplish
assigned tasks are generated by GPT-4 from the task de-
scriptions and additional parameterized inputs. We sample
10 high-quality code samples for each task which evaluated
by GPT-3.5 and filter out those with syntax errors, obtaining
executable programs for the robot to carry out in simulation.
Through this pipeline combining environment generation,
task specification, and program synthesis with large lan-
5


guage models, we build a diverse dataset for pre-training
robotic vision language reasoning models to accomplish
various daily household tasks. To avoid overfitting, we use
both the general vision language pre-training dataset and the
generated dataset together during the pre-training process.
The general vision language pre-training dataset we use con-
tains ShareGPT4V (Chen et al., 2023c) dataset, SViT (Zhao
et al., 2023) dataset, and the LLaVA Visual Instruct 150K
dataset (Liu et al., 2023d).
SFT Dataset.
The supervised fine-tuning (SFT) pro-
cess (Dong et al., 2023) is meticulously designed to refine
the model’s proficiency in robotic code generation by train-
ing the model with a curated selection of high-quality code
sequences that demonstrate a high success rate in evaluation.
To create high-quality and diverse code data, we take the task
types from the RT-1 (Brohan et al., 2022) and LIBERO (Liu
et al., 2023b) datasets as a basis and randomly combine
them with diverse objects to create a diverse set of tasks
for each task type. For each type of task, we provide high-
quality examples generated by humans, which have been
verified to ensure successful completion in both simulator
and real-world environments. We utilize GPT-4 to generate
corresponding code for each task, taking high-quality exam-
ples and API explanations as input. For code with correct
syntax but failed execution, we conduct an exhaustive search
of optional settings, including grasping method (central lift
or AnyGrasp), preferred contact position, preferred gripper
direction, and trajectory generation method (fixed direction
corresponding to objects’ joints or only fixed final position).
With the results of the search, we select the best option as
the label and use GPT-4V to analyze why it is better and
summarize it into coding annotations that serve as the label
of the chain-of-thought. For the codes that maintain a zero
success rate even after exploring optional settings, we manu-
ally revise the code and incorporate it into the example pool
of human-labeled data. It’s important to note that during the
SFT process, we still require general vision language data to
prevent overfitting. Specifically, we utilize the same subset
of the ShareGPT4V dataset used in the ShareGPT4V-7B
model’s SFT process (Chen et al., 2023c).
3.4. Vision Language Model Design
Our model adopts the fundamental paradigm of BLIP2 (Li
et al., 2023b), consisting of a vision transformer, Q-Former,
and language model. As code generation for complex tasks
tends to have considerable length and requires inputting long
API documentation prompts, we leverage the Q-Former to
bridge and compress the token quantity from the visual
modality. Specifically, the vision transformer encodes vi-
sual elements into rich representational tokens. As full
sequencing of these vision tokens alongside lengthy textual
prompts may result in a high requirement of GPU memory,
we adopt Q-Former to judiciously summarize the visual
embeddings into more compact sequence tokens. These
condensed representations capture the most task-relevant
visual concepts while reducing sequence length to save GPU
memory. The compressed Q-Former visual sequence tokens
are then fed into the language model along with text tokens
from code and documentation prompts. Furthermore, in or-
der to obtain hierarchical features from the image, we design
an efficient vision adapter that aggregates the features from
different stages in the vision transformer. We first divide
the hidden layers of the vision model into four parts propor-
tionally. Then, the class token is extracted from the final
layer of each part because it interacts with all tokens through
self-attention within that layer. We concatenate these class
tokens from the four hierarchical layers and enable interac-
tions among them via the vision adapter. The vision adapter
is a channel-wise attention network (Yan et al., 2021), which
first reduces the channel dimension through a linear layer,
then selects features using a SILU (Paul et al., 2022) acti-
vation, and finally restores the original channel dimension
using another linear layer (see pseudo-code in Appendix B).
Finally, the aggregated feature tokens are concatenated with
the other visual tokens. This combined set then serves as
the input for the subsequent modules.
4. Experiments
4.1. Evaluation on Manipulation Task
We evaluate our framework on a series of robotic manipula-
tion tasks with increasing complexity utilizing Gazebo (Qian
et al., 2014) for the realistic rendering of the environment
and the physical interactions: 1) open-vocabulary picking-
and-place task which involves 42 different object categories
from the YCB and Google Scanned object datasets, 2) Open-
ing and closing drawers from 5 typical cabinets taken from
PartNet-Mobility dataset (Xiang et al., 2020), 3) Opening
and closing doors from the same set of 5 cabinets, 4) Placing
objects in drawers, with the robot instructed to interact with
the ordered drawer, and 5) Multi-stage tasks composed of
sequential subtasks that need to be completed in order, such
as putting all the fruits in the drawer(see detailed setup in
Appendix A). The baselines consist of various multimodal
models and large language models, including GPT-4V, GPT-
3.5, and GPT-4, each equipped with open vocabulary object
detection models. Among them, GPT-4V is a multimodal
model taking images and language instructions as input,
while GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 are language-only models, the in-
puts being text scene descriptions containing object names,
attributes, and language instructions. For open vocabulary
detection, we choose GLIP-Large (Li et al., 2022b), owing
to its flexibility in handling diversified objects like “tiny
panda figure” in our tasks. We provide all the prompts
and the explanation of the APIs for code generation in Ap-
pendix E.
6


Nintendo Mario toy figure
Android toy figure
Blue box
Blue medication bottle
Brown box
Brown ceramic cup
Brown medication bottle
Cyan mug
Dog figure
Flourish red mug
Grey medication bottle
Lion toy figure
Maroon box
Panda toy figure
Toy bus
Toy train
White and brown box
White and green box
White and pink box
White and red box
White and yellow mug
White box
White porcelain mug
Wood block
Yellow medication bottle
Apple
Baseball
Orange
Peach
Pear
Plum
Softball
Racquetball
Red mug
Bleach cleanser
Mini soccer ball
Potted meat can
Tennis ball
Tomato soup can
Foam brick
Cracker box
Mustard bottle
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Success Rate
0
0
Avg:0.80
Avg:0.63
RoboCodeX
GPT4-V
Figure 3. Performance Comparison on pick and place task with diverse objects.
Table 1. Performance comparison among different tasks. We report
the average success rate of all the tasks over 50 trials.
Pick & Place Drawers Doors Put obj. in drawer Multi-stage
GPT-3.5
0.45
0.44
0.20
0.36
0.20
GPT-4
0.56
0.68
0.46
0.48
0.44
GPT-4V
0.63
0.68
0.52
0.55
0.50
RoboCodeX
0.80
0.84
0.74
0.68
0.64
As shown in Figure 3, RoboCodeX outperforms GPT-4V on
pick-and-place tasks, primarily due to using more suitable
priors for objects that GPT-4V struggled with. Compared to
GPT-4, adding visual inputs enables GPT-4V to infer better
grasp preferences. However, GPT-3.5 exhibited weaker rea-
soning abilities and often generated syntactically flawed text.
As shown in Table 1, RoboCodeX demonstrates stronger
capabilities than GPT-4V on articulated object manipulation
and long-term tasks. Its core competency lies in locating
target objects and corresponding handles across multiple
drawers and doors in the cabinet, and properly operating
them under physical constraints. For example, determining
whether the target cabinet door should be rotated clockwise
or counterclockwise relies more heavily on visual under-
standing, which highlights RoboCodeX’s advanced compe-
tencies in robotic manipulation beyond text-based interfaces.
Since long-term tasks involve many influencing factors, to
gain a clear understanding of how much each factor plays
into the whole long-term manipulation process, as shown
in Figure 6, we specifically conducted error analyses on
RoboCodeX’s and GPT-4V’s long-term task performance.
The results show both models can correctly understand and
decompose these tasks. The primary errors stem from sub-
optimal grasp pose selection and trajectory planning failures,
with the latter strongly correlated to grasp poses. Further-
more, RoboCodeX’s multi-modal code generation training
effectively reduces this error margin compared to GPT-4V.
4.2. Evaluation on Embodied Navigation Task
To test the performance of RoboCodeX on the visual
language object-navigation task, we conduct experiments
Table 2. Performance on Embodied Navigation Tasks. We report
the success rate and Success weighted by Path Length (SPL) as
the evaluation metrics(Anderson et al., 2018).
Method
HM3D
HSSD
Success ↑
SPL ↑
Success ↑
SPL ↑
L3MVN(GPT2)
35.2
16.5
38.4
19.4
Pixel-Nav(GPT4)
37.9
20.5
-
-
ESC(GPT3.5)
39.2
22.3
-
-
RoboCodeX
40.0
24.2
40.3
22.0
Table 3. Performance on general multimodal reasoning.
Model
LLaVA-Bench
MM-Vet
BLIP-2
38.1
22.4
InstructBLIP-7B
60.9
26.2
InstructBLIP-13B
58.2
25.6
LLaVA-1.5-7B
63.4
30.5
LLaVA-1.5-13B
70.7
35.4
RoboCodeX-13B
71.5
31.0
based on the HM3D (Ramakrishnan et al., 2021) and
HSSD (Khanna et al., 2023) datasets. For navigation tasks,
RoboCodeX mainly utilizes the L3MVN (Yu et al., 2023a)
framework, where it utilizes a large language model to de-
cide which frontier to select. We adopt this paradigm where
RoboCodeX performs multimodal visual reasoning over
the current observation and candidate frontiers and deter-
mines where to explore. We select the typical methods that
use large foundation models to assist robots on visual lan-
guage object navigation as key baselines, including L3MVN,
Pixel-Nav (Cai et al., 2023) which analyzes panoramic im-
ages and utilizes GPT-4 to determine the optimal pixel for
exploration, and ESC (Zhou et al., 2023b) which uses GPT-
3.5 (Ouyang et al., 2022) to determine the mid-term goal
from the frontier points during exploration. As shown in
Table 2, compared to these baselines, our method achieves
better performance and is comparable to GPT-3.5, which
demonstrates its general visual reasoning ability.
4.3. Evaluation on General VQA
To test RoboCodeX’s general multimodal understanding
and reasoning capabilities, we utilize two benchmarks: 1)
LLaVA-Bench (Liu et al., 2023d), a widely used benchmark
7


Place the persimmon closest to you in the bowl
Put the make-ups in the red bag
Put the Pepsi can in the drawer
Figure 4. Generalization among different types of robots in real world without any fine-tuning. We evaluate RoboCodeX with Franka
Emika Panda robot and UR5 robot in real world.
Pick and place
Articulated Objects
Pick obj. in drawer
Long-term Tasks
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
RoboCodeX
w/o vision adapter
w/o preference
w/o G-vqa
Figure 5. Ablation on the utilization of preference, vision adapter,
and whether to use general VQA data during fine-tuning. We
report the average success rate over 4 kinds of tasks over 50 trials.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Percentage of Total Trials
RoboCodeX
GPT-4V
Success
Grounding Error
Occupancy Error
Gripper collision
Trajectory optimization Error
Grasping failed
Figure 6. Failure modes comparison between RoboCodeX and
GPT-4V in long-term tasks.
for assessing multimodal conversation abilities. It scores
model responses against reference responses using GPT-4.
2) MM-Vet (Yu et al., 2023c), an evaluation benchmark
focused on complicated multimodal tasks, designed with
the insight that the ability to solve complex tasks is often
achieved by integrating different core vision-language ca-
pabilities into a generalist model. As shown in Table 3,
RoboCodeX demonstrates comparable general visual rea-
soning to LLaVA-1.5-13B (Liu et al., 2023c), the current
state-of-the-art 13B multi-modal model, even without spe-
cialized fine-tuning on robotic tasks.
4.4. Real World Experiments
To validate the generalization ability of RoboCodeX to dif-
ferent real-world scenarios across different robot platforms,
we test it on both the Franka Emika robot arm (Haddadin
et al., 2022) and the UR5 robot arm (Kebria et al., 2016)
which include multi-stage pick-and-place tasks, and put-
object-in-drawer tasks, in a zero-shot way. As shown in
Figure 4, the results show that our framework can adapt
to different robots out-of-the-box simply by changing the
robot’s configuration file, demonstrating its strong general-
ization to new scenarios without any specific fine-tuning.
4.5. Ablation Study
We conduct ablation studies to evaluate the contributions of
various components in the RoboCodeX’s framework, which
focus on examining the utility of the preference model,
the vision adapter, and the incorporation of general visual
question answering (G-VQA) data during fine-tuning.
Ablation on the preference. We evaluate whether the in-
ferred preference is necessary for robust manipulation, com-
pared to directly using the highest-scoring grasp predicted
by Anygrasp. As shown in Figure 5, the preference signifi-
cantly outperforms the baseline across all the tasks, which
highlights its efficacy in enhancing manipulation stability
and aligning with subsequent planning.
Ablation on vision adapter. To evaluate the effectiveness
of the vision adapter, we conduct an experiment by remov-
ing it from the model. The results indicate that the vision
adapter contributes to improving the success rate, primarily
by aiding the model in better understanding the fine details
of various objects. However, while it enhances performance,
it is not the most critical component that determines the
overall performance of the model.
Ablation on general VQA data utilization. We explore
the necessity of leveraging general VQA data during the
SFT process. The results indicate that without general VQA
(w/o G-VQA) data, the model exhibits significant overfit-
ting. Its ability to follow instructions for different objects
has deteriorated and it often answers questions improperly,
therefore the average success rate has dropped significantly.
Overall, the ablation studies confirm the critical role of
preference prediction and the vision adapter. These core
components work together to enable precise object handling
and adaptation to a variety of tasks. Furthermore, the incor-
poration of general VQA data during fine-tuning is essential
to prevent overfitting issues.
5. Conclusion
This work introduces RoboCodeX, a pioneering multi-
modal code generation framework that bridges the gap be-
8


tween multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) and
robotic control systems, innovatively translating semantic
understanding into tailored robotic behaviors. Through ex-
tensive experimentation, RoboCodeX demonstrates state-of-
the-art performance in complex robotic manipulation tasks,
showcasing its robustness and adaptability in both simulated
and real-world environments. The integration of a multi-
modal tree-of-thought approach, specialized dataset, and
iterative fine-tuning methodology significantly enhances the
model’s capacity to interpret visual observation and human
instructions into precise, robot-specific actions. Our find-
ings suggest that the fusion of MLLMs’ cognitive strengths
with nuanced physical world interactions heralds a new era
in embodied AI, where robots can efficiently adapt to and
manipulate their environment with unprecedented sophis-
tication. Future research could explore the expansion of
RoboCodeX’s capabilities to more diverse tasks, further
unlocking the potential of multi-modal AI in robotics.
Acknowledgments
We would like to express our profound gratitude to a dis-
tinguished group of individuals and teams whose excep-
tional contributions have been instrumental in advancing
our project. We are particularly grateful to Professor Yufeng
Yue and Dr. Guangyan Chen from the Beijing Institute
of Technology for their expertise in real-world robot code
deployment and their insightful feedback. Special acknowl-
edgment goes to Dr. Yifei Huang from the Shanghai AI
Lab for his support with egocentric human-object interac-
tion data and suggestions for pretraining egocentric vision
language models. Our thanks also extend to Professor Cewu
Lu, Dr. Wenhai Liu and Mr. Chenxi Wang from Shang-
hai Jiao Tong University for their support in integrating
the Anygrasp model seamlessly into our system, which has
been crucial in enhancing our project’s functionality. We are
deeply appreciative of the support from the teams led by Pro-
fessor Huazhe Xu and Professor Xueqian Wang at Tsinghua
University. Their extensive assistance in robot hardware has
been invaluable, allowing us to utilize cutting-edge technol-
ogy in the development of our project. Furthermore, we
are sincerely thankful to Dr. Ren´e Zurbr¨ugg from the ETH
AI Center for his assistance with the robot experimental
platform. These collaborations have not only significantly
enriched our project but also laid a foundation for future
innovation. We extend our heartfelt thanks to everyone for
their dedication, support, and invaluable contributions.
References
Agrawal, A., Prabhakar, R., Goyal, A., and Liu, D. Physical
reasoning and object planning for household embodied agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13577, 2023.
Ahn, M., Brohan, A., Brown, N., Chebotar, Y., Cortes, O., David,
B., Finn, C., Fu, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog,
A., Ho, D., Hsu, J., Ibarz, J., Ichter, B., Irpan, A., Jang, E.,
Ruano, R. J., Jeffrey, K., Jesmonth, S., Joshi, N., Julian, R.,
Kalashnikov, D., Kuang, Y., Lee, K.-H., Levine, S., Lu, Y., Luu,
L., Parada, C., Pastor, P., Quiambao, J., Rao, K., Rettinghouse,
J., Reyes, D., Sermanet, P., Sievers, N., Tan, C., Toshev, A.,
Vanhoucke, V., Xia, F., Xiao, T., Xu, P., Xu, S., Yan, M., and
Zeng, A. Do as i can and not as i say: Grounding language in
robotic affordances. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Alayrac, J.-B., Donahue, J., Luc, P., Miech, A., Barr, I., Has-
son, Y., Lenc, K., Mensch, A., Millican, K., Reynolds, M.,
et al. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learn-
ing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
23716–23736, 2022.
Anderson, P., Chang, A., Chaplot, D. S., Dosovitskiy, A., Gupta,
S., Koltun, V., Kosecka, J., Malik, J., Mottaghi, R., Savva, M.,
et al. On evaluation of embodied navigation agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1807.06757, 2018.
Bai, J., Bai, S., Yang, S., Wang, S., Tan, S., Wang, P., Lin, J., Zhou,
C., and Zhou, J. Qwen-vl: A frontier large vision-language
model with versatile abilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966,
2023.
Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Dabis, J., Finn,
C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., Hsu, J., et al.
Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Chen, X., Choro-
manski, K., Ding, T., Driess, D., Dubey, A., Finn, C., et al.
Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge
to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Cai, W., Huang, S., Cheng, G., Long, Y., Gao, P., Sun, C., and
Dong, H. Bridging zero-shot object navigation and foundation
models through pixel-guided navigation skill. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.10309, 2023.
Calli, B., Walsman, A., Singh, A., Srinivasa, S., Abbeel, P., and
Dollar, A. M. Benchmarking in manipulation research: The
ycb object and model set and benchmarking protocols. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1502.03143, 2015.
Chen, B., Xia, F., Ichter, B., Rao, K., Gopalakrishnan, K., Ryoo,
M. S., Stone, A., and Kappler, D. Open-vocabulary queryable
scene representations for real world planning. In 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 11509–11522. IEEE, 2023a.
Chen, K., Zhang, Z., Zeng, W., Zhang, R., Zhu, F., and Zhao, R.
Shikra: Unleashing multimodal llm’s referential dialogue magic.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15195, 2023b.
Chen, L., Li, J., Dong, X., Zhang, P., He, C., Wang, J., Zhao, F.,
and Lin, D. Sharegpt4v: Improving large multi-modal models
with better captions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12793, 2023c.
Chen, X., Wang, X., Changpinyo, S., Piergiovanni, A., Padlewski,
P., Salz, D., Goodman, S., Grycner, A., Mustafa, B., Beyer, L.,
et al. Pali: A jointly-scaled multilingual language-image model.
In ICLR, 2022.
Dasari, S., Gupta, A., and Kumar, V. Learning dexterous manipu-
lation from exemplar object trajectories and pre-grasps. In 2023
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 3889–3896. IEEE, 2023.
9


Ding, Y., Zhang, X., Paxton, C., and Zhang, S. Task and motion
planning with large language models for object rearrangement.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06247, 2023.
Dong, G., Yuan, H., Lu, K., Li, C., Xue, M., Liu, D., Wang, W.,
Yuan, Z., Zhou, C., and Zhou, J. How abilities in large language
models are affected by supervised fine-tuning data composition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05492, 2023.
Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai,
X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G.,
Gelly, S., et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale. In ICLR, 2020.
Downs, L., Francis, A., Koenig, N., Kinman, B., Hickman, R., Rey-
mann, K., McHugh, T. B., and Vanhoucke, V. Google scanned
objects: A high-quality dataset of 3d scanned household items.
In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 2553–2560. IEEE, 2022.
Driess, D., Xia, F., Sajjadi, M. S. M., Lynch, C., Chowdhery, A.,
Ichter, B., Wahid, A., Tompson, J., Vuong, Q., Yu, T., Huang,
W., Chebotar, Y., Sermanet, P., Duckworth, D., Levine, S.,
Vanhoucke, V., Hausman, K., Toussaint, M., Greff, K., Zeng, A.,
Mordatch, I., and Florence, P. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal
language model. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Eisner, B., Zhang, H., and Held, D. Flowbot3d: Learning 3d artic-
ulation flow to manipulate articulated objects. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.04382, 2022.
Fang, H.-S., Wang, C., Fang, H., Gou, M., Liu, J., Yan, H., Liu,
W., Xie, Y., and Lu, C. Anygrasp: Robust and efficient grasp
perception in spatial and temporal domains. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 2023.
Fang, Y., Wang, W., Xie, B., Sun, Q., Wu, L., Wang, X., Huang,
T., Wang, X., and Cao, Y.
Eva: Exploring the limits of
masked visual representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.07636, 2022.
Gao, J., Sarkar, B., Xia, F., Xiao, T., Wu, J., Ichter, B., Majumdar,
A., and Sadigh, D. Physically grounded vision-language models
for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02561,
2023.
Grauman, K., Westbury, A., Byrne, E., Chavis, Z., Furnari, A.,
Girdhar, R., Hamburger, J., Jiang, H., Liu, M., Liu, X., et al.
Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022.
Haddadin, S., Parusel, S., Johannsmeier, L., Golz, S., Gabl, S.,
Walch, F., Sabaghian, M., J¨ahne, C., Hausperger, L., and Had-
dadin, S. The franka emika robot: A reference platform for
robotics research and education. IEEE Robotics & Automation
Magazine, 29(2):46–64, 2022.
Hu, M., Mu, Y., Yu, X., Ding, M., Wu, S., Shao, W., Chen, Q.,
Wang, B., Qiao, Y., and Luo, P. Tree-planner: Efficient close-
loop task planning with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.08582, 2023.
Huang, C., Mees, O., Zeng, A., and Burgard, W. Visual language
maps for robot navigation. In 2023 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 10608–10615.
IEEE, 2023a.
Huang, W., Abbeel, P., Pathak, D., and Mordatch, I. Language
models as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge
for embodied agents. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022a.
Huang, W., Xia, F., Xiao, T., Chan, H., Liang, J., Florence, P.,
Zeng, A., Tompson, J., Mordatch, I., Chebotar, Y., et al. In-
ner monologue: Embodied reasoning through planning with
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b.
Huang, W., Xia, F., Shah, D., Driess, D., Zeng, A., Lu, Y., Florence,
P., Mordatch, I., Levine, S., Hausman, K., et al. Grounded
decoding: Guiding text generation with grounded models for
robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00855, 2023b.
Huang, Y., Cai, M., Li, Z., and Sato, Y. Predicting gaze in ego-
centric video by learning task-dependent attention transition. In
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision
(ECCV), pp. 754–769, 2018.
Huang, Y., Chen, G., Xu, J., Zhang, M., Yang, L., Pei,
B., Zhang, H., Dong, L., Wang, Y., Wang, L., and
Qiao,
Y.
Egobridge:
A dataset for bridging asyn-
chronous first- and third-person views of activities in the real
world. 2023c. URL https://egobridge.github.io/
static/videos/egobridge_paper.pdf.
Kebria, P. M., Al-Wais, S., Abdi, H., and Nahavandi, S. Kinematic
and dynamic modelling of ur5 manipulator. In 2016 IEEE inter-
national conference on systems, man, and cybernetics (SMC),
pp. 004229–004234. IEEE, 2016.
Khanna, M., Mao, Y., Jiang, H., Haresh, S., Shacklett, B., Batra,
D., Clegg, A., Undersander, E., Chang, A. X., and Savva, M.
Habitat synthetic scenes dataset (hssd-200): An analysis of
3d scene scale and realism tradeoffs for objectgoal navigation,
2023.
Khatib, O. A unified approach for motion and force control of
robot manipulators: The operational space formulation. IEEE
Journal on Robotics and Automation, 3(1):43–53, 1987.
Koubˆaa, A. et al. Robot Operating System (ROS)., volume 1.
Springer, 2017.
Lai, X., Tian, Z., Chen, Y., Li, Y., Yuan, Y., Liu, S., and Jia, J.
Lisa: Reasoning segmentation via large language model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.00692, 2023.
Li, B., Zhang, Y., Chen, L., Wang, J., Yang, J., and Liu, Z. Otter:
A multi-modal model with in-context instruction tuning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.03726, 2023a.
Li, J., Li, D., Xiong, C., and Hoi, S. Blip: Bootstrapping language-
image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding
and generation. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022a.
Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., and Hoi, S.
Blip-2: Bootstrap-
ping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders
and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597,
2023b.
Li, K., He, Y., Wang, Y., Li, Y., Wang, W., Luo, P., Wang, Y., Wang,
L., and Qiao, Y. Videochat: Chat-centric video understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06355, 2023c.
10


Li, L. H., Zhang, P., Zhang, H., Yang, J., Li, C., Zhong, Y., Wang,
L., Yuan, L., Zhang, L., Hwang, J.-N., et al. Grounded language-
image pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10965–
10975, 2022b.
Li, X., Zhang, M., Geng, Y., Geng, H., Long, Y., Shen, Y., Zhang,
R., Liu, J., and Dong, H. Manipllm: Embodied multimodal
large language model for object-centric robotic manipulation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16217, 2023d.
Li, Z., Yang, B., Liu, Q., Ma, Z., Zhang, S., Yang, J., Sun, Y., Liu,
Y., and Bai, X. Monkey: Image resolution and text label are
important things for large multi-modal models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.06607, 2023e.
Liang, J., Huang, W., Xia, F., Xu, P., Hausman, K., Ichter, B.,
Florence, P., and Zeng, A. Code as Policies: Language model
programs for embodied control. In IEEE International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500.
IEEE, 2023.
Liu, B., Jiang, Y., Zhang, X., Liu, Q., Zhang, S., Biswas, J., and
Stone, P. Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with
optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11477,
2023a.
Liu, B., Zhu, Y., Gao, C., Feng, Y., Liu, Q., Zhu, Y., and Stone,
P. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03310, 2023b.
Liu, H., Li, C., Li, Y., and Lee, Y. J. Improved baselines with visual
instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03744, 2023c.
Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., and Lee, Y. J. Visual instruction tuning.
NeurIPS, 2023d.
Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., and Lee, Y. J. Visual instruction tuning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023e.
Liu, L., Xu, W., Fu, H., Qian, S., Yu, Q., Han, Y., and Lu, C.
Akb-48: A real-world articulated object knowledge base. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14809–14818, 2022.
Lu, Y., Li, C., Liu, H., Yang, J., Gao, J., and Shen, Y. An empirical
study of scaling instruct-tuned large multimodal models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.09958, 2023a.
Lu, Y., Lu, P., Chen, Z., Zhu, W., Wang, X. E., and Wang, W. Y.
Multimodal procedural planning via dual text-image prompting.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01795, 2023b.
Mirjalili, R., Krawez, M., Silenzi, S., Blei, Y., and Burgard, W.
Lan-grasp: Using large language models for semantic object
grasping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05239, 2023.
Mo, K., Zhu, S., Chang, A. X., Yi, L., Tripathi, S., Guibas, L. J.,
and Su, H. PartNet: A large-scale benchmark for fine-grained
and hierarchical part-level 3D object understanding. In The
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2019.
Mu, Y., Zhang, Q., Hu, M., Wang, W., Ding, M., Jin, J., Wang, B.,
Dai, J., Qiao, Y., and Luo, P. Embodiedgpt: Vision-language
pre-training via embodied chain of thought. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.15021, 2023.
Nair, S., Rajeswaran, A., Kumar, V., Finn, C., and Gupta, A. R3m:
A universal visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023a.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023b.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C.,
Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A., et al.
Training language models to follow instructions with human
feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:27730–27744, 2022.
Padalkar, A., Pooley, A., Jain, A., Bewley, A., Herzog, A., Irpan,
A., Khazatsky, A., Rai, A., Singh, A., Brohan, A., et al. Open x-
embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.08864, 2023.
Paul, A., Bandyopadhyay, R., Yoon, J. H., Geem, Z. W., and Sarkar,
R. Sinlu: Sinu-sigmoidal linear unit. Mathematics, 10(3):337,
2022.
Peng, Z., Wang, W., Dong, L., Hao, Y., Huang, S., Ma, S., and Wei,
F. Kosmos-2: Grounding multimodal large language models to
the world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14824, 2023.
Puig, X., Ra, K., Boben, M., Li, J., Wang, T., Fidler, S., and
Torralba, A. VirtualHome: Simulating household activities via
programs. In CVPR, pp. 8494–8502, 2018.
Qi, C. R., Yi, L., Su, H., and Guibas, L. J. Pointnet++: Deep
hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric space.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Qian, W., Xia, Z., Xiong, J., Gan, Y., Guo, Y., Weng, S., Deng, H.,
Hu, Y., and Zhang, J. Manipulation task simulation using ros
and gazebo. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Biomimetics (ROBIO 2014), pp. 2594–2598. IEEE, 2014.
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever,
I., et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners.
OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Ramakrishnan, S. K., Gokaslan, A., Wijmans, E., Maksymets, O.,
Clegg, A., Turner, J., Undersander, E., Galuba, W., Westbury, A.,
Chang, A. X., et al. Habitat-matterport 3d dataset (hm3d): 1000
large-scale 3d environments for embodied ai. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.08238, 2021.
Raman, S. S., Cohen, V., Rosen, E., Idrees, I., Paulius, D., and
Tellex, S. Planning with large language models via corrective re-
prompting. In NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision
Making Workshop, 2022.
Rana, K., Haviland, J., Garg, S., Abou-Chakra, J., Reid, I., and
Suenderhauf, N. Sayplan: Grounding large language models
using 3d scene graphs for scalable task planning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.06135, 2023.
Singh, I., Blukis, V., Mousavian, A., Goyal, A., Xu, D., Tremblay,
J., Fox, D., Thomason, J., and Garg, A. ProgPrompt: Generating
situated robot task plans using large language models. In IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.
11


Song, C. H., Wu, J., Washington, C., Sadler, B. M., Chao, W.-
L., and Su, Y. Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for
embodied agents with large language models. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pp. 2998–3009, 2023.
Sucan, I. A., Moll, M., and Kavraki, L. E. The open motion
planning library. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, 19
(4):72–82, 2012.
Sun, Q., Yu, Q., Cui, Y., Zhang, F., Zhang, X., Wang, Y., Gao,
H., Liu, J., Huang, T., and Wang, X. Generative pretraining in
multimodality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05222, 2023.
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.-A.,
Lacroix, T., Rozi`ere, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., et al.
Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Vemprala, S., Bonatti, R., Bucker, A., and Kapoor, A. Chatgpt
for robotics: Design principles and model abilities. Microsoft
Auton. Syst. Robot. Res, 2:20, 2023.
Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu,
Y., Fan, L., and Anandkumar, A. Voyager: An open-ended
embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Wang, W., Chen, Z., Chen, X., Wu, J., Zhu, X., Zeng, G., Luo,
P., Lu, T., Zhou, J., Qiao, Y., et al. Visionllm: Large language
model is also an open-ended decoder for vision-centric tasks.
NeurIPS, 2023b.
Wang, W., Shi, M., Li, Q., Wang, W., Huang, Z., Xing, L., Chen,
Z., Li, H., Zhu, X., Cao, Z., et al.
The all-seeing project:
Towards panoptic visual recognition and understanding of the
open world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01907, 2023c.
Wu, S., Fei, H., Qu, L., Ji, W., and Chua, T.-S. Next-gpt: Any-to-
any multimodal llm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05519, 2023a.
Wu, T., Zhang, J., Fu, X., Wang, Y., Ren, J., Pan, L., Wu, W., Yang,
L., Wang, J., Qian, C., et al. Omniobject3d: Large-vocabulary
3d object dataset for realistic perception, reconstruction and
generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 803–814, 2023b.
Xiang, F., Qin, Y., Mo, K., Xia, Y., Zhu, H., Liu, F., Liu, M.,
Jiang, H., Yuan, Y., Wang, H., et al. Sapien: A simulated part-
based interactive environment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
11097–11107, 2020.
Xu, Z., He, Z., and Song, S. Universal manipulation policy network
for articulated objects. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
7(2):2447–2454, 2022.
Yan, J., Zhao, H., Bu, P., and Jin, Y. Channel-wise attention-based
network for self-supervised monocular depth estimation. In
2021 International Conference on 3D vision (3DV), pp. 464–
473. IEEE, 2021.
Yang, J., Dong, Y., Liu, S., Li, B., Wang, Z., Jiang, C., Tan, H.,
Kang, J., Zhang, Y., Zhou, K., et al. Octopus: Embodied vision-
language programmer from environmental feedback. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.08588, 2023a.
Yang, Z., Li, L., Lin, K., Wang, J., Lin, C.-C., Liu, Z., and Wang,
L. The dawn of lmms: Preliminary explorations with gpt-4v
(ision). arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17421, 9, 2023b.
Ye, J., Hu, A., Xu, H., Ye, Q., Yan, M., Dan, Y., Zhao, C., Xu, G.,
Li, C., Tian, J., Qi, Q., Zhang, J., and Huang, F. mplug-docowl:
Modularized multimodal large language model for document
understanding, 2023.
Yu, B., Kasaei, H., and Cao, M.
L3mvn: Leveraging large
language models for visual target navigation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.05501, 2023a.
Yu, Q., Wang, J., Liu, W., Hao, C., Liu, L., Shao, L., Wang, W., and
Lu, C. Gamma: Generalizable articulation modeling and manip-
ulation for articulated objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16264,
2023b.
Yu, W., Yang, Z., Li, L., Wang, J., Lin, K., Liu, Z., Wang, X.,
and Wang, L. Mm-vet: Evaluating large multimodal models
for integrated capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02490,
2023c.
Yuan, H., Zhang, C., Wang, H., Xie, F., Cai, P., Dong, H., and
Lu, Z. Plan4mc: Skill reinforcement learning and planning for
open-world minecraft tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16563,
2023.
Zeng, A., Attarian, M., Ichter, B., Choromanski, K., Wong, A.,
Welker, S., Tombari, F., Purohit, A., Ryoo, M., Sindhwani,
V., et al. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal
reasoning with language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00598,
2022.
Zhang, H., Li, X., and Bing, L. Video-llama: An instruction-tuned
audio-visual language model for video understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.02858, 2023a.
Zhang, P., Wang, X. D. B., Cao, Y., Xu, C., Ouyang, L., Zhao,
Z., Ding, S., Zhang, S., Duan, H., Yan, H., et al. Internlm-
xcomposer:
A vision-language large model for advanced
text-image comprehension and composition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.15112, 2023b.
Zhang, R., Han, J., Zhou, A., Hu, X., Yan, S., Lu, P., Li, H.,
Gao, P., and Qiao, Y. Llama-adapter: Efficient fine-tuning
of language models with zero-init attention. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.16199, 2023c.
Zhang, S., Sun, P., Chen, S., Xiao, M., Shao, W., Zhang, W., Chen,
K., and Luo, P. Gpt4roi: Instruction tuning large language
model on region-of-interest. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03601,
2023d.
Zhao, B., Wu, B., and Huang, T. Svit: Scaling up visual instruction
tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04087, 2023.
Zhong, C., Zheng, Y., Zheng, Y., Zhao, H., Yi, L., Mu, X., Wang,
L., Li, P., Zhou, G., Yang, C., et al. 3d implicit transporter for
temporally consistent keypoint discovery. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
3869–3880, 2023.
Zhou, H., Ding, M., Peng, W., Tomizuka, M., Shao, L., and Gan, C.
Generalizable long-horizon manipulations with large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02264, 2023a.
12


Zhou, K., Zheng, K., Pryor, C., Shen, Y., Jin, H., Getoor, L.,
and Wang, X. E. Esc: Exploration with soft commonsense
constraints for zero-shot object navigation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.13166, 2023b.
Zhou, Q.-Y., Park, J., and Koltun, V. Open3d: A modern library
for 3d data processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.09847, 2018.
Zhu, D., Chen, J., Shen, X., Li, X., and Elhoseiny, M. Minigpt-4:
Enhancing vision-language understanding with advanced large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10592, 2023a.
Zhu, X., Chen, Y., Tian, H., Tao, C., Su, W., Yang, C., Huang, G.,
Li, B., Lu, L., Wang, X., et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally
capable agents for open-world enviroments via large language
models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.17144, 2023b.
13


A. Manipulation Simulation Setup
In this section, we delineate the methodology employed
for constructing a sophisticated robotic simulation, integrat-
ing a Franka robotic arm within a dynamic environment
composed of different cabinets sourced from the PartNet-
Mobility Dataset and a table adorned with various objects.
Figure 7. Matching results of 2D bounding boxes.
Figure 8. 3D bounding boxes.
The simulation framework is anchored in ROS(Koubˆaa et al.,
2017) (Robot Operating System), utilizing Gazebo(Qian
et al., 2014) for the realistic rendering of the environment
and the physical interactions therein. The robotic arm’s mo-
tion planning is facilitated by the integration of the MoveIt
module, renowned for its comprehensive motion planning
capabilities, and the OMPL(Sucan et al., 2012) (Open Mo-
Figure 9. Visualization of the occupancy map. Occupancy maps
represent the environment as a grid, where each cell can be free,
occupied, or unknown.
tion Planning Library), which offers a suite of advanced
algorithms for efficient path planning and obstacle avoid-
ance. The choice of the Franka arm’s URDF (Unified Robot
Description Format) model and the incorporation of the
PartNet-Mobility Dataset’s cabinet model necessitated a
meticulous conversion and scaling process to ensure com-
patibility with the Gazebo environment. This setup’s fidelity
and functionality were rigorously validated through iterative
testing phases, focusing on the robot’s ability to physically
interact with the diverse objects. The agent processes three
distinct RGBD images, utilizing the GLIP model for visual
grounding, complemented by the reasoning outputs from
large foundation models in our baseline. As shown in Figure
7, multi-view 2D bounding boxes are aligned using geomet-
ric correspondences derived from depth data. These aligned
bounding boxes are then fed into the 3D perception loop.
It integrates multi-view RGBD images and 2D perception
grounding results to generate 3D bounding boxes for objects
as shown in Figure 8, as well as their corresponding point
clouds and occupancy maps as shown in Figure 9. Subse-
quently, the 3D point clouds are input into a grasp detection
module, which is responsible for generating the grasp pose.
B. Implementation details of Vision Langauge
Model
We employ the same architecture as BLIP-2 (Li et al.,
2023b). Specifically, we utilize the ViT-G/14 model from
EVA-CLIP (Fang et al., 2022) and remove its last layer,
using the output features of the second last layer instead.
For the frozen language model, we adopt a pre-trained
LLaMA-13B (Touvron et al., 2023) model and fine-tune
the q-former and language model using the ShareGPT4-V
14


dataset(Chen et al., 2023c). We then utilize the obtained lan-
guage model as the initial language model for multi-modal
code-generation pre-training and special finetuning. Addi-
tionally, we convert the data type of parameters of the frozen
ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and language model to FP16
during pre-training to increase efficiency.
Configuration Component
Details
Model Type
RoboCodeX
Parameters
- Hidden Size
5120
- Attention Heads
40 (Text), 16 (Vision)
- Intermediate Size
13824 (Text), 6144 (Vision)
Q-former
Standard Transformer
- Dropout Prob
0.1
- Encoder Hidden Size
1408
- Hidden Size
768
- Intermediate Size
3072
- Attention Heads
12
Vision Model
ViT
- Hidden Size
1408
- Intermediate Size
6144
- Attention Heads
16
Text Model
LLaMa
- Hidden Size
5120
- Intermediate Size
13824
- Attention Heads
40
Table 4. Model card of RobocodeX.
The detailed implementation of the vision adapter, which
takes the concatenated class tokens from different stage in
vision transformer as input, is demonstrated in Listing 1.
Listing 1. Pseudo-code of the Vision adapter
1
c l a s s
Adapter ( nn . Module ) :
2
def
i n i t
( s e l f ,
config ) :
3
super ( ) .
i n i t
( )
4
s e l f . config = config
5
s e l f . a c t i v a t i o n f n
= ACT2FN[ ” s i l u ” ]
6
h i d d e n s i z e = config . v i s i o n c o n f i g . h i d d e n s i z e
7
i n t e r m e d i a t e s i z e = h i d d e n s i z e
/ /
4
8
o u t p u t s i z e = config . q f o rm e r c o n f i g . h i d d e n s i z e
9
s e l f . fc1 = nn . Linear ( h i d d e n s i z e ,
i n t e r m e d i a t e s i z e )
10
s e l f . fc2 = nn . Linear ( i n t e r m e d i a t e s i z e ,
o u t p u t s i z e )
11
s e l f . layernorm = nn . LayerNorm ( o u t p u t s i z e ,
eps= config .
v i s i o n c o n f i g . layer norm eps )
12
def
forward ( s e l f ,
h i d d e n s t a t e s :
t o r c h . Tensor ) −> t o r c h .
Tensor :
13
h i d d e n s t a t e s =
s e l f . fc1 ( h i d d e n s t a t e s )
14
h i d d e n s t a t e s =
s e l f . a c t i v a t i o n f n ( h i d d e n s t a t e s )
15
h i d d e n s t a t e s =
s e l f . fc2 ( h i d d e n s t a t e s )
16
h i d d e n s t a t e s =
s e l f . layernorm ( h i d d e n s t a t e s )
17
r e t u r n
h i d d e n s t a t e s
C. Joint prediction of Articulated Objects
In this work, we adopt GAMMA (Yu et al., 2023b) as the
base model and then fine-tune it using improved point clouds
from multiple views. This is because GAMMA only uses
the point cloud obtained from a single depth camera, result-
ing in domain gaps in our experimental setting. Except for
the point cloud sources, all settings remain the same as in
GAMMA. The GAMMA framework first analyzes articu-
lated objects by segmenting them into distinct rigid parts
and estimating their articulation parameters from a partial
point cloud observation P = {pi ∈R3}N
i=1. GAMMA
utilizes a PointNet++ backbone for feature extraction and
has three key components: segmentation, offset, and joint
parameter estimation.
1. Segmentation Head: It classifies each point into cate-
gories - static, revolute, or prismatic (ˆci ∈{0, 1, 2}).
2. Offset Head: It computes offset vectors
 ˆoi ∈R3
,
guiding points towards their part centroids.
3. Joint Parameter Head: It predicts joint parameters,
projecting each point onto the joint axis
 ˆvi ∈R3
and
estimating the axis direction

ˆdi ∈R3
.
The training involves minimizing a loss function, combining
segmentation, offset, and joint parameter losses:
L = 1
N
N
X
i
h
Lc(ˆci, ci)+Lo(ˆoi, oi)+Lv(ˆvi, vi)+Ld(ˆdi, di)
i
,
Here, Lo(ˆoi, oi) is the offset loss, calculated as:
Lo(ˆoi, oi) = ∥ˆoi −oi∥−
 oi
∥oi∥2
·
ˆoi
∥ˆoi∥2

After training, we freeze parameters for feature inference.
We perform clustering using DBSCAN, grouping points
into part clusters based on the predicted semantics and axis-
aware shifts (pi + ˆoi) and (pi + ˆvi). Each segmented part
assists in voting for joint parameters.
The final performance on unseen testing set is shown in
Table 5.
Table 5. Evaluation on articulated objects joint prediction.
Objects
AP 75
Axis Direct Error
Axis Trans Error
Joint Type Acc (%)
Cabinet
83.13
6.57
10.52
97.5
Microwave
95.72
2.56
3.71
100
Refrigerator
89.75
8.92
5.36
100
D. Grasp Pose Prediction
D.1. Grasp Pose Proposal Generation
In the realm of robotic grasping, the effective generation
of grasp poses is pivotal for successful object manipulation.
This paper delineates two distinct models for Grasp Pose
15


Proposal Generation, allowing an agent to choose based
on preferences inferred by the advanced algorithmic frame-
work, RoboCodeX.
The first model, Anygrasp, is documented in Fang et al.
(2023) (Fang et al., 2023). Anygrasp is a sophisticated pre-
trained model adept at generating grasp poses. It utilizes
a single RGB image and a corresponding point cloud to
propose collision-free grasps, specifically tailored for a par-
allel jaw gripper. The model’s efficacy lies in its ability
to interpret complex scenes and propose viable grasping
solutions.
The second model, herein referred to as the “central lift”
method, takes a different approach by generating top-down
grasp poses. This method simplifies the grasp generation
process, focusing on the central lifting points of objects,
which often align with their center of mass.
Further, to refine the grasp selection process, three
specific preferences are incorporated into the function
“parse adaptive shape grasp pose()”. It is crucial to select
these preferences judiciously, as they vary significantly de-
pending on the task requirements and the physical char-
acteristics of the targeted objects. The preferences are as
follows:
• Preferred Position: An Optional parameter, indicating
the preferred position for the gripper tip point.
• Preferred Approach Direction: An Optional parame-
ter, denoting the preferred approach direction for the
gripper.
• Preferred Plane Normal: An Optional parameter, rep-
resenting the preferred normal direction of the gripper’s
plane.
D.2. Grasp Execution
Upon the determination of an optimal grasp pose, the subse-
quent phase involves its execution. Leveraging the insights
from Dasari et al. (2023) (Dasari et al., 2023), a simplified
pre-grasp strategy is employed. Let −→p symbolize the iden-
tified grasp point, and −→a represent the approach vector as
suggested by the grasping model. The trajectory followed
by the robot gripper is mathematically expressed as:
⟨−→p −0.1−→a , ; −→p −0.08−→a , ; −→p ⟩
This trajectory indicates an approach towards the target
object from a pre-defined position, progressively reducing
motion increments to ensure precision and stability. The
gradual deceleration is a critical aspect of the process, es-
pecially for handling lightweight or delicate objects that
are susceptible to displacement or damage through abrupt
movements.
The final phase of the grasp involves a closed-loop actua-
tion of the gripper, ensuring a secure yet careful grip on the
object. This process is meticulously controlled to avoid ex-
erting excessive force, thereby preventing potential damage
to the object being manipulated.
E. Introduction of the APIs and the prompts
The provided Python application programming interface
(API) enables code generation for robot control and plan-
ning within robot operating systems. As demonstrated in
Listing 2 and Listing 3, the APIs we provided contain mod-
ules for operating system interactions via ROS, robot percep-
tion utilities for sensing environments, and motion planning
capabilities. Key perception functions determine object po-
sitions, bounding boxes, grasp poses, detected objects, and
plane normals. Manipulation functions handle attaching, de-
taching, and moving objects. For motion, the API offers path
planning and execution, including generating paths around
joints and following predefined trajectories. Gripper poses
and grasps can be controlled explicitly. As shown in Listing
4, we also design prompts to guide large foundation models
in adaptively generating robotic grasp poses. Our method
leverages preferred positions, approach directions, and plane
normals to create task-oriented gripper alignments and orien-
tations. By using preferences rather than hard-coded values,
our approach enables versatile grasping behavior tailored to
specific tasks and objects. The rationale behind these pref-
erences is crucial - they select appropriate grasps aligned
and oriented to the task and target. Depending on complex-
ity, additional helper functions may be required, definable
in external scripts to ensure completion. For safety and
effectiveness, we establish boundaries within the robot’s
workspace. We also advocate avoiding hard-coded values
in prompts where possible, instead using APIs and tools to
dynamically adapt values to varying tasks and objects. This
ensures responsiveness. Finally, we strictly emphasize that
only Python code and comments starting with ‘#’ can be
generated.
F. Real world experiments
To assess the cross-platform generalization capability of our
RoboCodeX framework, we conducted experiments involv-
ing two distinct robot arms: the Franka Emika Panda robot
arm and the UR5 robot arm, all without any task-specific
fine-tuning tailored to each platform. Despite the inher-
ent differences in environments and object sets between
the two robotic systems, RoboCodeX delivered impressive
results on both platforms by simply modifying the robot
configuration file. As demonstrated in Figure 10, the UR5
robot arm exhibited remarkable precision in tasks involving
fruit and cosmetic manipulations, while the Franka Emika
Panda robot arm adeptly positioned a toy on a car as per the
16


Put the make-ups in the red bag
Help the toy sit on the car
Put the Pepsi can in the drawer
Place the persimmon closest to you in the bowl
Put the rubbish in the brown box
Figure 10. Real world experiments on Franka Emika Panda robot arm and UR5 robot arm.
17


given instructions. The adaptability of our system across
these robot arms, without the need for platform-specific
training, underscores its versatility for multi-robot deploy-
ment. These zero-shot transfer experiments vividly show-
case RoboCodeX’s ability to generalize control policies
effectively to new testbeds with minimal reconfiguration,
making it a valuable asset for scalable real-world robot
learning.
18


Listing 2. Python API for Code Generation (part one)
1
#You can use the following imported modules and functions in your script:
2
3
# Import rospy, the foundational Python library for ROS (Robot Operating System)
4
import rospy
5
6
# Import move_group, the class handle for moving the robot arm in MoveIt!
7
import move_group
8
9
# Import various ROS message types for handling robot pose and orientation
10
from geometry_msgs.msg import PoseStamped, Pose, Point, Quaternion
11
12
# Import utility functions for perception
13
from perception_utils import (
14
get_object_center_position,
# Returns the position of an object in the world frame.
Returns: position: np.array [x,y,z]
15
get_object_pose,
# Returns the pose of an object in the world frame.
Returns: pose: Pose
16
get_3d_bbox,
# Returns the 3D bounding box of an object in the world
frame. Args: object_name: str. Returns: bbox: np.array [x_min, y_min, z_min, x_max
, y_max, z_max]
17
get_obj_name_list,
# Returns a list of names of objects present in the scene
18
parse_adaptive_shape_grasp_pose, # Parse adaptive grasp pose for objects. Args:
object_name: str, preferred_position: Optional(np.ndarray); preferred gripper tip
point position; preferred_approach_direction: Optional(np.ndarray), preferred
gripper approach direction; preferred_plane_normal: Optional(np.ndarray),
preferred gripper plane normal direction. Returns: grasp_pose: Pose
19
parse_central_lift_grasp_pose, # This method involves a vertical lifting action. The
gripper closes at the center of the object and is not suitable for elongated
objects and is not suitable for the objects with openings, as the gripper’s width
is really small. It is optimal for handling spherical and cuboid objects without
any opening that are not ideal for off-center grasping. Args: object_name: str,
description: Optional(str) in [’top’, ’center’], Returns: grasp_pose: Pose
20
parse_place_pose,
# Predict the place pose for an object relative to a
receptacle. Args: object_name: str, receptacle_name: Optional(str), position:
Optional(np.array) [x,y,z], . Returns: place_pose: Pose
21
detect_objects,
# Detect and update task-relevant objects’ status in the
environment. Call this function before interaction with environment objects. Args:
object_list: Optional(List[str]), objects to detect.
22
get_object_joint_info,
# Get the joint info of an object closest to a given
position. Args: obj_name: str, name of the object; position: np.ndarray, select
the joint closest to this position; type: str, allowed type of the joint, choice
in [’any’, ’revolute’, ’prismatic’]. Returns: joint_info: dict, joint info of the
object. {’joint_position’:[x,y,z],’joint_axis’:[rx,ry,rz],’type’:str}
23
get_plane_normal,
# Get the plane normal of an object closest to the given
position. Args: obj_name: name of the object position: np.ndarray, select the
plane closest to this position. Returns: np.ndarray, normal vector [x,y,z]
24
)
19


Listing 3. Python API for Code Generation (part two)
1
# You can use the following imported modules and functions in your script:
2
3
# Import utility functions for robot motion planning and execution
4
from motion_utils import (
5
attach_object,
# Attaches an object to the robot gripper in the planning space. Call
this function right after closing the gripper. Args: object_id: str.
6
detach_object,
# Detaches an object from the robot gripper in the planning space.
Call this function right after opening the gripper. Args: object_id: str.
7
open_gripper,
# Open the gripper. No args.
8
close_gripper,
# Close the gripper. No args.
9
move_to_pose,
# Move the gripper to pose. Args: pose: Pose
10
move_in_direction, # Move the gripper in the given direction in a straight line by
certain distance. Note that you can use the surface normal and the joint axis.
Args: axis: np.array, the move direction vector ; distance: float.
11
generate_arc_path_around_joint, # Generate a rotational gripper path of poses around
the revolute joint. Args: current_pose: Pose, current pose of the gripper;
joint_axis: np.array, the joint axis of the revolute joint; joint_position: np.
array, the joint position of the revolute joint; n: int, number of waypoints;
angle: float, angle of rotation in degree. Returns: path: List[Pose]
12
follow_path,
# Move the gripper to follow a path of poses. Args: path: List[Pose]
13
get_gripper_pose, # Get the gripper pose. No args. Returns: pose: Pose
14
grasp,
# Executes a grasp motion at the grasp_pose. Args: grasp_pose: Pose
15
)
16
You are encouraged to use above APIs to complete the task.
Listing 4. Other Prompts for Code Generation
1
# There are three preferences for function parse_adaptive_shape_grasp_pose().
2
# Note that you need to choose the right preferences for different tasks and objects.
3
# preferred_position: Optional(np.ndarray), preferred gripper tip point position.
4
# preferred_approach_direction: Optional(np.ndarray), preferred gripper approach direction
.
5
# preferred_plane_normal: Optional(np.ndarray), preferred gripper plane normal direction.
6
# This preference selects the grasp pose so that the gripper is parallel to the plane
defined by the normal.
7
# It also means the gripper grasping at an axis with perpendicular pose to the axis.
8
# Note that you may always need to create your arbitrary functions to help you complete
the task, which will be defined by external scripts.
9
# The robot working space on table top is in range [-0.5, 0.2] in x-axis and [-0.5, 0.5]
in y-axis. The height of the table top is 1.05.
10
# Note that you are a strict coder, you can not hard code a predefined value, but you need
to use api and tools to detect the value.
11
# Please pay attention to the description and specific requirements of the target object
in the task. You may need to write some founctions by yourself to determine whether
the requirements are met.
12
# Your generated content should only contain comments starting with ’#’ and python code!
20