1
TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution
of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
SIQI GU, State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
QUANJUN ZHANG, State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
KECHENG LI, State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
CHUNRONG FANG∗, State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
FANGYUAN TIAN, The State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
LIUCHUAN ZHU, Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd., China
JIANYI ZHOU, Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd., China
ZHENYU CHEN, State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
Unit testing is crucial for detecting bugs in individual program units but consumes time and effort. Recently,
large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in generating unit test cases.
However, several problems limit their ability to generate high-quality unit test cases: (1) compilation and
runtime errors caused by the hallucination of LLMs; (2) lack of testing and coverage feedback information
restricting the increase of code coverage; and (3) the repetitive suppression problem causing invalid LLM-based
repair and generation attempts. To address these limitations, we propose TestART, a novel unit test generation
method. TestART improves LLM-based unit testing via co-evolution of automated generation and repair
iteration, representing a significant advancement in automated unit test generation. TestART leverages the
template-based repair strategy to effectively fix bugs in LLM-generated test cases for the first time. Meanwhile,
TestART extracts coverage information from successful test cases and uses it as coverage-guided testing
feedback. It also incorporates positive prompt injection to prevent repetition suppression, thereby enhancing
the sufficiency of the final test case. This synergy between generation and repair elevates the correctness
and sufficiency of the produced test cases significantly beyond previous methods. Through comparative
experiments, TestART demonstrates an 18% improvement in pass rate and a 20% enhancement in coverage
across three types of datasets compared to baselines. Additionally, it achieves better coverage rates than
EvoSuite with only half the number of test cases. These results demonstrate TestART’s superior ability to
produce high-quality unit test cases by harnessing the power of LLMs while overcoming their inherent flaws.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering →Software testing and debugging; • Computing
methodologies →Natural language processing.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Software Testing, Unit Test Generation, Large Language Model, Testing
and Analysis, AI for SE
Authors’ addresses: Siqi Gu, siqi.gu@smail.nju.edu.cn, State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; Quanjun Zhang, quanjun.zhang@smail.nju.edu.cn, State Key Laboratory for Novel
Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; Kecheng Li, 522024320081@smail.nju.edu.cn, State Key
Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; Chunrong Fang, fangchunrong@
nju.edu.cn, State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; Fangyuan
Tian, The State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; Liuchuan Zhu,
zhuliuchuan1@huawei.com, Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd., Beijing, China; Jianyi Zhou, zhuliuchuan1@
huawei.com, Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd., Beijing, China; Zhenyu Chen, zychen@nju.edu.cn, State Key
Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Association for Computing Machinery.
1049-331X/2025/0-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.
arXiv:2408.03095v6  [cs.SE]  31 Mar 2025


1:2 Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
ACM Reference Format:
Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu
Chen. 2025. TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and
Repair Iteration. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 0, 0, Article 1 ( 2025), 25 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.
XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Unit testing is crucial in software development and is the basic procedure of the software testing
process. The primary goal of unit testing is to generate a suite of unit test cases that can improve
code coverage and detect errors in the targeted software early during the development process.
In unit testing, the focal method, which generally refers to the specific method or function being
tested, is the primary target of most unit tests. However, manually creating and maintaining unit
test cases can be laborious and time-consuming [52]. To mitigate these difficulties, researchers
propose various methodologies and tools to automate the unit test generation process. Based on
different technological foundations and application scenarios, the automated unit test generation
tools can be categorized into two main types [51]: traditional program analysis-based [14, 33] and
language-model-based [2, 7, 8, 52, 65]. Traditional program analysis-based methods include search-
based [6, 13, 15, 18], constraint-based [34, 44], and random-based [5, 40] techniques. However, the
most widely used search-based software testing (SBST) tools (e.g., EvoSuite [14] and Pynguin [33])
generate test cases that differ significantly from human-written ones. This makes it challenging
to read, understand, or modify to reuse the generated unit test cases [16]. Language model-based
approaches based on transformer architecture [54] like A3Test [2] and AthenaTest [52] can learn
from real-world focal methods and generate developer-written test cases. However, they cannot even
correct a syntax error by engaging with the model, resulting in most generated tests being incorrect
and low passing rates. Recently, large language models (LLMs, e.g., ChatGPT [39]) demonstrate
improved performance over previous language-model-based methods on unit testing, represented
by several works [4, 7, 8, 65]. These methods can generate test cases that approximate human-level
comprehension and deliver relatively high coverage, making them a central focus in this field.
However, these methods remain constrained by the instability and hallucination issues inherent
in LLMs. While fine-tuning techniques have been proposed to mitigate hallucination problems, they
tend to increase both time and financial costs. Additionally, ineffective prompt engineering, along
with an insufficient understanding of environmental dependencies, can lead to compilation errors
due to invalid context information. Furthermore, LLMs can barely run and analyze the generated
test cases [8], so they are hard to obtain the testing feedback, including error report or coverage
feedback [51], which may cause runtime errors and low coverage rates. Although developers
can re-enter the feedback information from compilers to LLMs and request them to repair bugs,
the inevitable faithfulness hallucination [20] problem could make this self-repair interaction into
potentially endless iterations. Even with continuous attempts, the test cases remain difficult to
optimize due to the impact of the repetitive suppression problem [60, 66].
To address the aforementioned issues and mitigate the impact of hallucinations, in this paper, we
propose TestART. TestART is a novel unit test generation method enhanced by the co-evolution of
automated generation and repair iteration based on the LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT-3.5). We aim to utilize
the generation capability of LLMs and the synergy of the generation-repair mechanism to create
high-quality unit test cases. TestART starts by pre-processing the source code and then utilizes the
LLMs to generate an initial set of test cases. These test cases undergo a loop involving compilation,
execution and repair to identify, capture and fix errors based on TestART’s repair strategy. TestART
uses a template-driven repair strategy tailored to the outputs of LLMs, prioritizing template-based
repairs and resorting to LLM-based repair only for unresolved cases. After that, TestART evaluates
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:3
Fig. 1. The common workflow of LLM-based unit testing generation method
the coverage rates of executed test cases. If the coverage meets a high standard, the test cases are
output as the final result. If not, we use the positive prompt injection and the coverage-guided
testing feedback to alleviate the hallucination and incrementally generate test cases for the next
iteration. As a result, TestART can automatically generate test cases with high passing execution
and coverage rates under the co-evolution between the generation and repair processes, reducing
manual intervention significantly.
To verify the effectiveness of TestART, we conduct extensive experiments to compare TestART
with state-of-the-art automated unit test generation approaches on open-source and industrial
benchmarks. The experimental results show that the pass rate of test cases generated by TestART
can far exceed other methods, reaching 78.55% on Defects4J, with an improvement of 18% compared
to both ChatGPT-4.0 model and ChatUniTest. In addition, TestART achieves an average line coverage
rate of 90.96% on passed focal methods, exceeding the SBST tool EvoSuite by 3.4% with only half
the number of test cases. We also complete ablation experiments to verify the effectiveness of
modularization. The experimental results show that TestART effectively utilizes LLMs’ generation
capability and generates high-quality unit test cases.
To sum up, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• Method. We propose TestART, a method designed to enhance LLM-based unit testing through
the synchronized evolution of automated generation and iterative repair. TestART leverages
the generative capabilities of LLMs by integrating generation-repair co-evolution, testing
feedback and positive prompt injection into the iteration, repairing the bugs contained in the
generated test cases and feeding back the coverage information for outputting high-quality
test cases.
• Tool. We integrate TestART into a Python tool, which is the first tool that combines automated
unit test generation with APR. We make the code for the tool and the experimental data
available on GitHub (https://github.com/sikygu/TestART).
• Study. We conduct a comprehensive experiment to evaluate the performance of TestART
on the open-source and industrial datasets. Compared with different baselines, TestART
demonstrates superior performance, with an 18% improvement in pass rate and a 20% en-
hancement in coverage rate. Additionally, TestART achieves better coverage than EvoSuite
while utilizing only half the number of test cases. The evaluation results demonstrate that
TestART can suppress the hallucination problem and generate high-quality test cases.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:4 Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
Fig. 2. The motivation of TestART
2
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
This section outlines the typical workflow for utilizing LLMs to generate unit test cases and presents
an example to illustrate the motivation behind the proposal of TestART.
2.1
LLM-based Unit Test Generation
Nowadays, with the explosion of LLMs represented by ChatGPT, the LLM-based unit test generation
methods attract more attention. To reduce time and financial costs, mainstream researchers reduced
their reliance on fine-tuning strategies and instead shifted towards exploring viable prompting
mechanisms for generating test cases [8, 46, 57, 65]. Based on previous works, Fig. 1 illustrates the
commonly used workflow for constructing prompts and performing testing validation to generate
test cases using LLMs. Most of the approaches consist of three main modules: prompt constructor, test
validator and processing engine. Firstly, the prompt constructor initializes system prompts, defining
the role of the LLMs as a “testing expert”. Then, the source code is taken as part of different user
prompts, instructing LLMs to generate the test cases. Secondly, after getting the generated test
cases, the test validator invokes the compiler and controller to perform dynamic analysis on the test
cases. If the test cases do not compile or execute successfully, they will be subject to the processing
engine along with the error message. Thirdly, researchers use various engines, including static
analysis, error message parser, or LLM-repair, to further process the results and update the user
prompt to improve the LLM-generated test cases. Ultimately, after several iterations, these methods
yield test cases of comparable quality.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:5
Fig. 3. The Overview of TestART
2.2
Motivation
To further elucidate the limitations of using LLMs, we present an example to introduce our motiva-
tion. As shown in Fig. 2, a focal method getShortClassName from project Lang in dataset Defects4J
is used to generate unit test cases. The function of the code snippet is to resolve the Java class name.
EvoSuite and ChatGPT-3.5 are used to generate Test Case 1 and Test Case 2 for this focal method,
respectively. After compiling and executing the two test cases, we inspect the testing results and the
coverage area for the source code. Even though Test Case 1 can pass the compilation and execution,
it cannot cover a deeper branch (the “if” branch framed in orange) due to the complexity of the
preconditions. To satisfy the condition to enter this branch, the original className string should
be an internal representation indicating an array of reference data types (e.g., Ljava.lang.String).
Conversely, Test Case 2 seems to meet the condition for covering this branch but it fails to compile
due to a simple error of variable type in another section of the code. In this instance, repairing the
compilation error in Test Case 2 by changing the variable null to (String) null yields Test Case 3,
which successfully runs and covers that branch.
The main insight from this example is that although LLM-generated test cases exhibit high
logic quality, they are frequently compromised by simple errors, adversely affecting the pass and
coverage rate. In fact, the pass rate of test cases directly generated by ChatGPT does not exceed
50% [65]. Meanwhile, due to the issue of repetitive suppression in LLMs [66], the output from
LLMs often includes repetitive or highly similar results, containing similar errors. Therefore, we
propose applying the automated program repair (APR) technique that utilizes predefined templates
to precisely and reliably correct these errors rather than only relying on LLMs to repair bugs.
3
APPROACH
In this section, we first present the overview of the proposed TestART, followed by a detailed
examination of its key modules. The workflow of TestART is illustrated in Fig. 3. Given a source
code, TestART initially performs pre-processing (as described in Sec. 3.1) to alleviate the hallucina-
tion problem. Afterward, TestART leverages the ChatGPT-3.5 model to generate the initial set of
test cases 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒(as explained in Sec. 3.2). Once generated, 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒enters the co-evolution
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:6 Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
loop (depicted by the yellow arrows in Fig. 3), which aims to produce high-quality final test cases.
Specifically, TestART submits 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒for compilation and execution to capture error messages.
Based on the captured errors (compilation errors, runtime errors, or other detected bugs), TestART
applies the repair strategy to address these errors and recompiles and runs until it passes without
bugs or reaches the maximum number of iterations. If the test cases still unsuccess, 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒is dis-
carded. Otherwise, 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒is promoted to 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠. Next, TestART employs JUnit and OpenClover
to evaluate the coverage of 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠over the source code, transforming the uncovered areas into
test feedback. If 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠meets the coverage standard, it will be output as the final result (𝑇𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙).
Otherwise, 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠and the coverage-guidance feedback are provided as positive prompt injections
to the ChatGPT-3.5 model, continuing to the next co-evolution loop and revert to 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒. A
detailed description of the co-evolution of automated generation and repair is introduced in Sec. 3.3.
Benefiting from this synergy, TestART can iterate test cases incrementally and ensure that each
round of test cases passes successfully, which continuously improves coverage.
3.1
Pre-processing
To alleviate the LLM hallucination issue and reduce token consumption, the source code undergoes
a pre-processing step, including removal and compression. TestART first removes comments
and redundant blank lines from the code. Comments may make the code bulky, which is not
conducive to maintenance and debugging and is prone to the LLM hallucination problem caused
by inconsistencies between comments and code content. Eliminating extra blank lines helps
standardize the code. Afterward, TestART compresses the excessive source code context. Secondly,
LLMs do not perform well in processing overly long texts (although they do not exceed the token
limit), but the focal method and its callable functions may be extensive. This phenomenon brings
two main issues: 1) the callable classes and functions have lengthy text in total, and simple deletion
can affect the accuracy of the test case; 2) a large amount of invalid content leads to an excess of
redundant information. Therefore, designing a compression strategy that maintains the code at
an optimal length is essential, enabling LLMs to focus on the focal method. Considering that the
method body accounts for a large proportion of the entire class structure, TestART’s compression
strategy focuses on compressing callable functions by only including method signatures while
retaining the complete method bodies of focal methods. Following is an example:
-
public static float toFloat(final String str){
return toFloat(str, 0.0f);
-
}
+
public static toFloat(String): float
It is worth noting that other elements, such as class variables and constants, are not compressed
in this process to preserve the key structure and functionality of the code. Thus, the compressed
context can still clearly describe the test scenario while maintaining a minimal token. In all, our
compression strategy aims to reduce irrelevant information interference while retaining enough
context to support the next generation step.
3.2
Initial Generation
After pre-processing the source code, TestART utilizes the system prompt and fills the initial
generation prompt templates to generate the initial candidate test cases. The system initialization
prompt is depicted in the system prompt part at the top of Fig. 3. To make LLMs understand the
testing environment and reduce the token consumption, TestART extracts the variables required
for running in focal methods, including method signatures, the number of lines starting and ending
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:7
the method, etc. After that, TestART produces the test code and related information to fill the initial
generation prompt templates (far left of Fig. 3). TestART requests the LLMs to process the filled
prompt and generate the initial𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒. This enables TestART to transform the initial set of testing
requirements into tasks that LLMs can easily comprehend, thereby reducing human-computer
interaction and achieving automated test case generation. Then, TestART tries to compile and run
the generated test cases.
3.3
Synergy
However, the initial 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒are imperfect, leading to low pass and coverage rates. Therefore,
we propose the co-evolution of automated generation and repair iteration to iterate the test cases.
The synergy process is reflected in 1) the repair strategy, which mainly uses templates to precisely
repair the errors in 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒to get 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠, and 2) the generation process, which uses positive
prompt injection and coverage guidance to incrementally generate next iteration 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒based
on𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠. This section details the Repair Strategy, Coverage-guided Testing Feedback, and Positive
Prompt Injection in the following.
3.3.1
Repair Strategy. By analyzing the errors in the initial 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒, we find that the LLM-
generated test cases exhibit systematic and distinct errors. Moreover, due to the problem of repetitive
suppression, these errors tend to recur. Because these errors are inherently produced by the
LLMs, correcting them using the models alone proves challenging. Consequently, we developed
repair templates based on expert knowledge, drawing upon the most advanced traditional repair
techniques. Specifically, TestART first identifies the location of the erroneous code and extracts the
error messages. We separate the compilation and execution of the test code into two distinct steps to
more accurately identify the source of any errors and apply the corresponding repair templates. For
compilation errors, TestART identifies issues by analyzing the logs generated during compilation.
These logs contain detailed error messages, the location in the code where the error occurred,
and relevant warning information. For runtime errors, TestART locates errors by examining the
stack trace information. Then TestART utilizes corresponding templates to repair the test code.
To address spelling and range errors that template-based repair cannot cover, TestART attempts a
one-time LLM-based repair after multiple failed template repair attempts. Unlike previous repair
strategies applied to semantic buggy code [30, 31, 68], TestART focuses on repairing compilation
errors (including syntax errors, import errors, and scope errors) and runtime errors that appear
in the generated test cases. Our repair strategy focuses more on the internal logic and expected
behavior of the test cases, aiming at increasing the correctness. TestART can repair the most
common errors in LLM-generated test cases by designing five experiential repair templates, which
are simple, stable and effective (reaching 50% and 75% of compile and runtime error repair rates,
respectively). In the following, we demonstrate the five templates and how the buggy test code can
be repaired using the designed templates.
T1: Check Package Import. The most common compilation error is the symbol parsing error,
which occurs when the compiler generates a “cannot find symbol” prompt. Import errors often
account for a large proportion of the time. TestART first indexes the test project, JDK and all
third-party dependent JAR packages to obtain the fully qualified class names of all accessible Java
classes (e.g., java.util.HashMap) during testing. During compilation, determine whether an import
error causes the compilation error. If so, extract the missing class name from the compilation result
and find the fully qualified class name of the class from the index, then import it. In T1, ClassName
is an unimported class, and packageReference is the package name where the class is located.
+
import packageReference.ClassName;
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:8 Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
After compilation, test cases fail when the test results do not match expectations, which is called
test failure. We design templates for two main situations: assertion error and runtime error. If
“AssertionError” or “org.junit.ComparisonFailure” is found in the stack trace information, TestART
checks the assertion type and error code line, using the corresponding template to repair it.
T2: Mutate Assertion Statements. Boolean assertion errors comprise a significant proportion
of runtime errors (accounting for 25% in our experiments). When the assertNull method is used in
a test case for assertion and the test fails, it means that the object being checked is not null, which
contradicts the expectation. In such cases, correcting assertNull to assertNotNull is a quick-fix
strategy. Conversely, if assertNotNull is used and the test fails, it indicates that the object is null. In
this case, assertNotNull should be changed to assertNull. This template is also applied to assertTrue
and assertFalse.
-
Assert.assertNull(param);
+
Assert.assertNotNull(param);
or
-
Assert.assertNotNull(param);
+
Assert.assertNull(param);
-
Assert.assertTrue(param);
+
Assert.assertFalse(param);
or
-
Assert.assertFalse(param);
+
Assert.assertTrue(param);
T3: Replace Expected Values. AssertEqual assertion errors account for the highest proportion
of runtime errors (accounting for 40% in our experiments). When using the assertEquals method
in test cases for assertion, it is usually necessary to compare whether two values are equal. If the
test fails, the reason is the expected value does not match the actual execution result. In some
cases, the expected value in the test case is incorrectly specified. T3 replaces the expected value in
assertEquals from an incorrect or outdated value to the correct current actual value. We use regular
expressions to extract the expected and actual values from the test report. To maintain the intended
meaning of assertions and verify the expected output of expressions, T3 does not directly switch
from using assertEquals to assertNotEquals.
-
Assert.assertEquals(expectedValue, expression);
+
Assert.assertEquals(actualValue, expression);
T4: Insert Check Statements. Unit test cases often define the test oracle through exceptions.
When running unit tests, if a test case encounters a runtime exception, it usually means there is a
potential error in the code or the test case fails to simulate exception handling logic correctly. T4 is
based on the type of error ExceptionType thrown by the target code line, wrapping the error code
line with try-catch statements and catching the corresponding exception.
-
obj.method1();
+
try{
obj.method1();
}catch(ExceptionType e){
// Expected
+
}
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:9
T5: Mutate Check Statements. In the LLM-generated unit test cases, a certain code segment
may throw an exception and thus add a try-catch statement to catch the expected exception type.
However, suppose the caught exception type is incorrect. In that case, the actual thrown exception
type mismatches the specified exception type in the catch statement, and the buggy code causes
an uncaught exception at runtime, potentially leading to program crashes or unstable operations.
In addition, a code segment can throw different types of exceptions. Merely catching one type
of exception is insufficient to thoroughly handle all potential error situations. Therefore, if the
existing catch statement does not catch the actual thrown exception type, T5 adds a new catch
statement specifically for this newly discovered exception type. This template ensures that the
handling logic for the original exception types remains intact to avoid introducing new errors from
modifications and covers a broader range of error scenarios.
try{
obj.method1();
}catch(ExceptionType1 e){
//mismatched or insufficient
}
+
catch(ExceptionType2 e){
// Expected
+
}
LLM-based Repair. The template repair cannot fix the remaining detail errors, such as syntax
and range errors. After trying to match and repair using the five templates, if there is still a situation
that fails to compile or run, TestART uses the corresponding prompt to guide the LLMs to repair
the test code; the prompt information is as shown in Fig. 4. Finally, successfully repaired 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒
becomes 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠and feeds to the next module.
Fig. 4. The prompt of LLM-based repair
3.3.2
Coverage-guided Testing Feedback. Since LLMs can barely validate𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠, testing sufficiency
is hard to guarantee and improve. Therefore, TestART proposes the coverage-guided testing
feedback module to guide LLMs in generating test cases based on uncovered branch conditions
iteratively. Specifically, after getting 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠in the current round, according to Fig. 3, TestART
invokes the Junit and OpenClover tools to calculate the coverage of the executed test cases and
provide coverage-guided testing feedback. First, if the branch coverage reaches the coverage
standard (e.g., 95%) or the number of iterations reaches the preset limit, TestART outputs the
current test case as a high-quality test case and ends the iteration. If not, second, TestART calculates
the code coverage by identifying branches in the focal method not covered by testing. Afterward,
TestART processes this information and provides feedback to LLMs to guide the generation in
subsequent rounds. Specifically, TestART extracts all uncovered branch content and integrates the
testing information into a coverage report. This report includes class names, method names, and
the specific code of the uncovered branches, along with an indication of whether the true or false
branches are not covered. Third, the testing information is formatted according to a predefined
template (shown in Fig. 5) and sent to the LLMs.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:10Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
Fig. 5. The process of positive prompt injection and coverage-guided testing feedback
3.3.3
Positive Prompt Injection. While TestART repairs the initial 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒to obtain 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠and
extracts feedback on test coverage, LLMs remain unaware of these repair actions when𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠enters
the next iteration of co-evolution to increase coverage. Consequently, in subsequent iterations,
the LLMs continue generating based on the initial 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒instead of the improved 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠. Due
to the hallucination problem, directly informing the LLMs that 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠is the revised version still
results in errors in subsequent outputs. To alleviate this situation, we design a positive prompt
injection module to help LLMs generate better incremental test cases in the co-evolution process
and reduce the required tokens.
Prompt injection technique is used for attacking and defending LLMs [9]. It involves inserting
unexpected or malicious content into the prompt to change the system’s behavior, extract unautho-
rized data, or trigger unintended actions. The core is that altering the output of the LLMs induces
LLMs to perceive the modified content as its original generation. However, unlike injecting attacks,
which are considered negative, TestART treats the repaired test cases 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠as positive injections
to mitigate hallucination.
Precisely, TestART injects (𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠) as a positive prompt to minimize context and computational
costs. This module enables LLMs to consistently generate the same or similar test cases within the
correct paradigm. As shown in Fig. 5, it indicates one iterative process of generation, repair, positive
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:11
Table 1. The description of datasets used in the experiment
Dataset
Project name
Abbr.
Version
Focal methods
Total
Learned?
Defects4J
Gson
Gson
2.10.1
378
8192
Y
Commons-Lang
Lang
3.1.0
1728
Y
Commons-Cli
Cli
1.6.0
177
Y
Commons-Csv
Csv
1.10.0
137
Y
JFreeChart
Chart
1.5.4
5772
Y
HITS dataset
Event-ruler
RUL
1.4.0
165
885
N
Windward
WIN
1.5.1
156
N
batch-processing-gateway
BPG
1.1
564
N
Internal dataset
Project1
P1
-
82
668
N
Project2
P2
-
332
N
Project3
P3
-
36
N
Project4
P4
-
218
N
prompt injection and coverage-guided testing feedback. After initial generation, LLMs output the
generated unit test cases 𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒, which may include several bugs. Then TestART applies the
repair strategy and successfully repairs the bugs, resulting in 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠. To mitigate hallucination
issues, TestART injects𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠as the prompt in place of𝑇𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒, leading LLMs to perceive𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠
as the initial generation. Next, TestART calculates the coverage information and constructs the
template to give feedback to LLMs. Through incremental evolutionary iterations, 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠achieves
the coverage standard and outputs as 𝑇𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙.
4
EXPERIMENT DESIGN
Our evaluation is designed to answer the four main research questions (RQs):
RQ1: How does the correctness of the test case of TestART compare to the baseline? What are
the error types in the test cases and how well does TestART repair different error types?
RQ2: How does the sufficiency of the test case of TestART compare to the baseline?
RQ3: How does the combination of different parts impact the robustness of TestART?
RQ4: What is the performance of TestART when applied to unlearned datasets? and how well
does it generalize to new data?
RQ5: What is the time and money cost of TestART to generate test cases?
4.1
Datasets
To verify our method, we select the most commonly used open-source dataset Defects4J. We also
use an unlearned dataset (created after the cutoff date of the training data of GPT-turbo-3.5) and
an industrial dataset to avoid potential problems caused by data leakage. We extract all public,
non-abstract classes as focal classes (i.e., classes whose modifiers include “public” and do not include
“abstract”), and we extract public methods within these classes as focal methods (i.e., methods that
include the “public” modifier).
Defects4J [22] is a collection of reproducible software bugs and supporting infrastructure to
advance research in software engineering. We follow previous work [8] and select five Java projects
from Defects4J to evaluate TestART, shown in Table 1. We extracted public and non-abstract classes
from five projects as focal classes and extracted their public methods as focal methods, a total of
8192 focal methods extracted.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:12Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
HITS dataset [57] comprises internet-sourced projects developed after the knowledge cutoff date
for ChatGPT-3.5, indicating that the LLMs have no training data from this dataset. The HITS dataset
contains 885 focal methods from 3 projects. We retain the part of the dataset in the original paper
that is not duplicated in Defects4J as this dataset.
Internal dataset is an internal Java unit test dataset provided by Huawei. This dataset contains a
total of 668 completely internal Java focal methods. This means that the open-source model cannot
learn the data features of this part. The specific configuration of the dataset is shown in the Table 1.
4.2
Baselines
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposal, we compare TestART with four baselines. We choose
the state-of-the-art methods of four kinds of solutions as baselines including the SBST tool (Evo-
Suite), the language-model-based method (A3Test), the Large language model (two ChatGPT
models) and the LLM-based test case generation approach (ChatUniTest). Note that CHATTESTER
is excluded from baseline comparisons due to 1) the similar LLM-based repair methodology with
ChatUnitTest and 2) ChatUnitTest shows better performance than CHATTESTER in the experiments
according to HITS[57].
EvoSuite [14] is a traditional unit test generation tool that uses evolutionary algorithms to create
new test cases and a fitness function to direct the search process. This approach helps achieve high
code coverage criteria, such as branch and line coverage.
A3Test [2] is a test case generation approach based on deep learning that is enhanced with asser-
tion knowledge and includes a mechanism to verify naming consistency and test signatures. A3Test
applies domain adaptation principles to adapt existing knowledge from an assertion generation
task to the test case generation task.
ChatGPT [39] is a highly advanced technology that can replicate human speech and reasoning by
learning from a vast library of human communication. It achieves performance levels comparable
to humans in professional and academic settings. ChatGPT-3.5 and ChatGPT-4.0 are set as two
different baselines.
ChatUniTest [8] is a ChatGPT-based automated unit test generation tool developed by the
Generation-Validation-Repair framework. ChatUniTest generates tests by analyzing the project,
extracting critical information, and creating an adaptive context that includes the focal method and
its dependencies within a set token limit.
4.3
Evaluation Metrics
To validate the experimental results based on four research questions, we set four key evaluation
perspectives: correctness (1-4), sufficiency (5-8), error detection (9-10), and the test case count (11).
The specific descriptions are as follows:
(1) Syntax Error (SE) refers to the percentage of the test code that includes Java syntax error,
verifying by Java parser.
(2) Compile Error (CE) refers to the percentage of the test code that produces errors during the
compilation.
(3) Runtime Error (RE) refers to the percentage of the test code that includes error or failure
during the execution.
(4) Pass Rate (Pass) refers to the percentage of the test code that is syntactically accurate, compiles
and runs without errors or failures. It includes calls to the tested method and assertions and
allows the target focal method to pass.
(5) Branch Coverage of Correct Test (BCCT) represents the branch coverage rate of the passed
focal methods.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:13
(6) Line Coverage of Correct Test (LCCT) represents the line coverage rate of the passed focal
methods.
(7) Total Branch Coverage (TBC) represents the branch coverage ratio of all the focal methods.
(8) Total Line Coverage (TLC) represents the line coverage ratio of all the focal methods.
(9) Mutation Coverage (MC) represents the ratio of the number of mutations killed by tests to
all the number of mutations (regardless of whether tests covered it or not).
(10) Test Strength (TS) represents the ratio of the number of mutations killed by tests to the
number of all mutations covered by tests.
(11) Test Case Count (TCC) represents the total number of test cases generated by the testing
approach.
(12) Assertion Count (AC) represents the total number of assertions contained in the generated
test cases.
4.4
Experimental Setup
In the experiment, TestART generates unit tests for each focal method through up to four iter-
ations.TestART selects the best test case by prioritizing execution success, maximum coverage,
and minimal test count. To compare more fairly with the baseline, TestART and ChatUniTest
utilize GPT-3.5-turbo-0125 as the basic model by calling the API, which offers a 16k context length,
with the temperature setting adjusted to 0.5. During the operation of ChatUniTest, we set its max-
PromptTokens parameter to 16,385 and generate unit test cases through the default maxRounds
of five iterations per attempt. When we conduct the baseline experiment using ChatGPT-3.5 and
ChatGPT-4.0, we obtain test cases using the initial generation of TestART. We train the model of
A3Test based on the Methods2Test dataset [53] and pre-trained model [1], setting the learning rate
of 1e-5 for 110 epochs. We configure EvoSuite with 3 CPU cores, allocating 2000MB of memory to
each core, and set the search time up to 10 minutes. During the testing process, Java 1.8 is used
as the compiler and runtime environment, JUnit 4 is employed as the unit testing framework and
OpenClover is used to calculate coverage rates. We calculate the mutation coverage based on the
state-of-the-art mutation testing system PITest1, and the mutators are set by default (11 kinds of
mutators). We repeat each experiment three times and take the average as the final result.
5
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we aim to evaluate the proposed TestART’s performance based on the answers to
all research questions.
5.1
Answer to RQ1 (Correctness)
Design. We set RQ1 to determine the fundamental attribute of unit test cases: whether they pass
when executed. The focal method is seen as the unit of calculation for all statistical results. If an
approach fails to generate a unit test case for a specific focal method, that focal method is classified
as “Fail”. Otherwise, four metrics of correctness are calculated for the test cases of that focal method.
In addition, we statistic the repair rate of all compile and runtime errors on different error types.
EvoSuite primarily uses test cases as the unit of analysis for statistics, which differs from the setting
of this experiment; therefore, we do not make comparisons with EvoSuite on correctness.
Results. As presented in Table 2, we first demonstrate the results of our TestART on five sub-
projects respectively. Then, we compare the average results of TestART and four baseline methods
on the complete dataset. The data in the table clearly shows that TestART achieves the best
results with a compilation error rate of 12.43%, a runtime error rate of 8.50%, and a final
1https://github.com/hcoles/pitest.git
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:14Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
Table 2. The correctness performance of TestART compared with different baselines on Defects4J
Method
Projects
Focal methods
Fail
SE↓
CE↓
RE↓
Pass↑
TestART(Ours)
Gson
378
1.06%
0.79%
23.54%
11.11%
63.49%
Lang
1728
0.00%
0.12%
4.17%
7.87%
87.85%
Cli
177
0.00%
1.69%
12.99%
9.60%
75.71%
Csv
137
0.73%
0.00%
10.22%
12.41%
76.64%
Chart
5772
0.02%
0.50%
14.21%
8.39%
76.89%
A3Test
0.00%
24.43%
34.77%
25.54%
15.26%
ChatGPT-3.5
0.07%
0.45%
25.09%
24.48%
49.91%
ChatGPT-4.0
Total
8192
0.01%
0.05%
19.43%
20.75%
59.75%
ChatUnitTest
0.70%
0.60%
23.35%
16.47%
60.05%
TestART(Ours)
0.07%
0.45%
12.43%
8.50%
78.55%
Fig. 6. Repair rates of TestART on Defects4J
pass rate of 78.55%. Compared with the second place in each indicator, TestART reduces the
compilation error rate by 7.0% compared to ChatGPT-4.0 and was 8.0% lower than ChatUniTest
in the running error rate. The total pass rate is 63.29% higher than A3Test, 28.64% higher than
ChatGPT-3.5, 18.80% higher than ChatGPT-4.0, and 18.50% higher than ChatUniTest. We also show
the repair rates and the corresponding error types in Fig. 6. The three most common compilation
errors (“cannot find symbol”, “Method call error” and “Access denied”) can be repaired with about
50% success. The overall repair rate of runtime errors is as high as 75%.
Analysis. The experimental results show that TestART achieves the highest correctness due
to the repair strategy. Although ChatUniTest also incorporates repair steps (primarily based on
LLMs), experimental results demonstrate that using fixed repair templates in TestART is more
effective. The insight is that the test cases generated by LLMs often have relatively consistent
errors because of the repetitive suppression problem. However, LLMs can barely run the test cases
to get error feedback, so using LLMs for debugging and repairing often gets stuck in a vortex,
making it hard to achieve the passing execution results. Further, to specifically demonstrate the
error types fixed by TestART and how well it repairs, we present the repair rates of ten compile
error types and eight runtime error types in Fig. 6. Error types that occur less than 50 times are
classified as “other”. The implementation and inheritance of the abstract method and class lead to
the lowest compile error repair rate for “Abstract method not be implemented” and “Abstract class
cannot be instantiated” errors. The two errors with the highest compile repair rate are “Syntax
error” and “Cannot find symbol”, which benefit from feedback error reports to LLMs for self-repair
and T1 in TestART, respectively. Relatively, the runtime error repair rate is much higher than the
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:15
Table 3. Total coverage comparison on Defects4J
Method
TBC↑
TLC↑
A3Test
15.04%
14.63%
ChatGPT-3.5
43.10%
42.58%
ChatUnitTest
48.68%
47.39%
ChatGPT-4.0
51.86%
50.88%
TestART(Ours)
69.40%
68.17%
Table 4. The ablation study results of TestART on Defects4J
Method
TBC ↑
TLC ↑
Pass↑
ChatGPT-3.5
43.10%
42.58%
49.91%
+ Repair
62.13%
62.24%
78.55%
+ Repair + Iteration
66.48%
64.49%
78.55%
TestART
69.40%
68.17%
78.55%
Fig. 7. Coverage rate of correct test and test case count for TestART and EvoSuite on Defects4J dataset.
compile error. T2 in TestART makes four error types (“AssertNull”, “AssertNotNull”, “AssertTrue”
and “AssertNotNull”) almost 100% repaired. Due to complex parameter formats and data types,
errors caused by “AssertEquals” and “Exceptions” can still be repaired by 65.37% and 82.03% based
on T3 and T4, respectively. Note that the errors of “Fail” and “Others” are repaired by LLMs, so the
repair rates are relatively low.
Answer to RQ1
TestART outperforms all the baselines on the evaluation of correctness. The repair
strategy effectively repairs main compile and runtime errors, improving the quality
and usability of LLM-generated test cases.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:16Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
5.2
Answer to RQ2 (Sufficiency)
Design. To answer this research question, we compare the coverage of unit tests generated by
TestART and the other four baselines. The coverage of the source code presents the sufficiency
of testing. We use four main evaluation metrics to describe the sufficiency of the generated unit
test cases. We count the number of focal methods for which passing test cases are generated by
different methods (passed focal methods). Due to this difference, we calculate two coverage metrics
(branch and line) based on the passed focal methods and the total focal methods, respectively. Total
coverage indicates the testing results for the overall dataset, while the coverage of correct tests
reflects the quality of coverage of test cases, both contributing to testing sufficiency.
Results. Table 3 and Fig. 7 present the sufficiency of TestART compared to the baselines. As
shown in Table 3, TestART achieves the highest TBC and TLC, which are 69.40% and 68.17%,
respectively. Compared to the second-ranked ChatGPT-4.0, TestART improves TBC by 17.54% and
TLC by 17.29%. As the same method experimented with based on the ChatGPT-3.5, ChatUniTest
is not superior to ChatGPT-4.0 but exceeds the coverage of ChatGPT-3.5. Meanwhile, TestART
achieves average coverage rates of 17% higher than ChatGPT-4.0. Fig. 7 shows BCCT, LCCT and
the generated test case count of TestART and EvoSuite for five sub-projects. TestART achieves
88.54% branch coverage and 90.96% line coverage rates, exceeding EvoSuite by 2.5% and
3.4%, respectively. It is noteworthy that the test cases generated by TestART are about half the
number produced by EvoSuite (12,359 compared to 23,570), greatly reducing the execution costs.
Analysis. Through Table 3, we can see that TestART achieves the unquestionably highest
coverage results compared to LLM-based methods on the total dataset. This improvement mainly
benefited from the coverage-guided testing feedback and positive prompt injection. Under the
coverage information guidance, incremental iteration of test cases can extensively cover areas that
were missed by the original test cases. In addition, due to the inability to count the number of
focal methods correctly tested by EvoSuite, we compare the coverage of the two methods on the
passed focal methods. That is, the denominator of the coverage calculation is the total number
of branches/lines of the focal methods correctly tested by TestART. From Fig. 7, we observe that
TestART outperforms EvoSuite in three projects, while in the remaining two, it trailed by an average
coverage rate of only 5%. This performance is notable given that EvoSuite, as an SBST method,
seeks to cover source code by generating a large number of test cases. In contrast, TestART utilizes
the powerful generative capabilities of LLMs to produce high-quality test cases in just half the
quantity yet manages to achieve comparable quality to EvoSuite.
Answer to RQ2
The test cases generated by TestART are much more sufficient to test the source code,
proving the highest coverage rate compared to other baselines. TestART also achieves
better testing sufficiency than EvoSuite with fewer test cases.
5.3
Answer to RQ3 (Ablation)
Design. To validate the effectiveness of the different modules in TestART, we construct an ablation
study of different parts of TestART to research its inner function. We conduct ablation experiments
using three metrics on three incomplete and one complete TestART.
Results. Table 4 shows the ablation study results of TestART, which demonstrates that the
complete TestART achieves the best performance. We present the results for four different mutations
of TestART: Only ChatGPT-3.5, adding repair (+ Repair), adding repair and iteration includes
positive prompt injection (+ Repair + Iteration), and adding repair, iteration, and coverage-
guided testing feedback (Complete TestART). From Table 4, the repair strategy plays a vital role,
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:17
Table 5. The experimental results of TestART and two baseline methods on HITS dataset.
Project
Method
CE↓
RE↓
Pass↑
TBC↑
TLC↑
BCCT↑LCCT↑TCC
MC↑
TS↑
AC
RUL
EvoSuite
-
-
57.15% 27.20% 38.64% 67.81% 84.63% 421
37.40% 65.28%
-
ChatGPT-3.5
47.88% 20.00% 32.12% 29.94% 30.98% 93.23% 96.45% 249
32.36% 71.76%
181
TestART
30.30% 8.48%
59.39% 58.59% 58.14% 98.63% 98.76% 300
49.60% 75.40%
320
WIN
EvoSuite
-
-
12.50% 17.39% 11.33% 73.61% 74.12% 8
11.47% 65.79%
-
ChatGPT-3.5
50.64% 20.51% 27.56% 26.60% 26.42% 96.51% 95.57% 200
38.07% 74.77%
92
TestART
30.77% 7.05%
60.26% 59.46% 58.54% 98.68% 96.19% 234
59.17% 85.43%
260
BPG
EvoSuite
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
ChatGPT-3.5
25.89% 10.11% 63.48% 62.78% 63.05% 98.72% 98.27% 655
38.27% 87.35%
858
TestART
18.62% 2.84%
77.48% 75.85% 75.89% 98.74% 98.83% 7109
49.29% 88.68%
1120
Total
EvoSuite
-
-
35.46% 22.43% 25.37% 70.63% 79.52% -
27.90% 65.35%
-
ChatGPT-3.5
34.35% 13.79% 51.30% 50.28% 50.61% 97.43% 98.09% 1104
34.45% 56.94%
1131
TestART
22.94% 4.63%
71.30% 69.74% 69.52% 98.17% 98.24% 1253
53.11% 79.20%
1700
increasing the Pass by 28.64%, TBC by 19.03% and TLC by 19.66%. The iteration and coverage-guided
testing feedback both contribute to the improvement of the coverage rate by about 3%.
Analysis. The results from Table 4. show that different parts of TestART contribute to improving
the quality of test cases. The most apparent core module for improvement is the repair strategy,
which not only enhances the pass rate but also improves the coverage rate. This validates that our
fixed templates do not improve pass rate at the expense of coverage. As mentioned in the motivation
section, LLMs can generate high-quality test cases, but low pass rates limit the overall coverage
rate. TestART solves the problem effectively through the empirical repair templates. In addition,
positive prompt injection as a main part of iteration ensures that LLMs converge incrementally
during loops. It is essential to suppress hallucination for LLMs; otherwise, the generated test cases
will lead to a decrease in the pass rate.
Answer to RQ3
The outcomes of the ablation study demonstrate that every component of TestART
plays a crucial role in enhancing the quality of the generated test cases. The complete
TestART achieves the highest coverage and pass rates.
5.4
Answer to RQ4 (Generalization)
Design. We set RQ4 primarily to verify TestART’s performance on unlearned new data to avoid
data leakage. Since HITS [57] only experiments with certain complex focal functions within the
dataset and does not validate all public focal methods of the entire project, we do not use this
method as a baseline. We don’t report EvoSuite’s results on the BPG project because BPG is not
executable on Java 1.8. We present the results of TestART along with two baseline methods shown
in Table 5. The experiment results primarily include evaluation across three dimensions: correctness
(CE, RE and Pass), coverage (TBC, TLC, BCCT and LCCT) and test case count.
Results. TestART clearly achieves superior performance in each project. In terms of overall
HITS dataset comparisons, TestART increases correctness by approximately 20% and surpasses
ChatGPT-3.5 by 19% in both test branch coverage (TBC) and test line coverage (TLC). Additionally,
TestART generates 1,253 test cases for 885 focal methods, only 13% more than ChatGPT-3.5.
Analysis. Table 5 clearly demonstrates that TestART maintains a high level of accuracy im-
provement even when facing untrained new data. The 20% increase in Pass indicates that our
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:18Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
(a) Time cost of TestART for single focal
method.
(b) Money cost of TestART for 100 generations of each project.
Fig. 8. Cost of TestART.
proposed repair strategy is equally effective on new data. We also analyze the repair results, finding
that TestART successfully repaired 41.08% of compilation errors and 71.70% of runtime
errors. This aligns with the repair effectiveness observed on the Defect4J dataset. In addition,
The nearly 20% increase in both TBC and TLC further demonstrates that TestART achieves high
testing effectiveness without significantly increasing the number of test cases. We also find that
the correctness and coverage results on Defects4J and HITS dataset are almost indistinguishable,
which suggests that the issue of data leakage does not significantly affect our method.
Answer to RQ4
TestART demonstrates strong performance on the unlearned dataset, achieving a stable
accuracy improvement while effectively generalizing to new data.
5.5
Answer to RQ5 (Cost)
Design. In software engineering, both time cost and monetary cost are crucial metrics for evaluating
unit test generation tools. In terms of time cost, if the generation process takes too long, it will
negatively impact development efficiency and reduce the tool’s practicality. As for monetary cost,
TestART utilizes ChatGPT by calling APIs, and each invocation incurs a certain fee. Whether this
cost is reasonable is also a significant factor affecting the practicality of the unit test generation
tool. This experiment evaluates the temporal efficiency of TestART by measuring the time required
to generate unit test cases for individual focal methods. Additionally, it quantifies the monetary
expenditure across three key phases—initial generation, repair, and iteration—for each project
within the Defects4J benchmark.
Results and Analysis. Fig. 8a illustrates the time consumption of TestART for unit test genera-
tion tasks. As shown in the figure, 68.58% of the unit test generation tasks are completed within one
minute, while 90.59% are finished within two minutes. Although a small portion of tasks requiring
repair and iteration may consume more time, 99% of the tasks can be completed within five minutes.
The maximum search time we set when generating test cases using EvoSuite is 10 minutes, which
means TestART is more efficient than EvoSuite.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:19
Fig. 9. The experimental results of TestART on Internal dataset
Fig. 8b presents the average cost of TestART for every 100 generations across different projects.
The experiment calculates the cost based on the pricing of GPT-3.5-turbo-0125: 0.5$/Mtoken for
prompt and 1.5$/Mtoken for completion. As shown in the figure, the total cost varies among
different projects. Gson has the lowest unit test generation cost, averaging approximately 0.2$ for
100 times unit test generation, while Lang requires about 0.45$. Furthermore, the initial generation
phase accounts for the largest proportion of the total cost, constituting approximately 50%. The
combined costs of code repair and iterative feedback make up the remaining 50%. In some projects,
such as Lang, the repair cost is higher than the iteration cost. This is because most focal methods
in Lang are relatively simple, and once the test cases pass execution, they can achieve full branch
and statement coverage without requiring further iterations. In contrast, for the Chart project, the
iteration cost exceeds the code repair cost. This is attributed to the higher proportion of complex
and large focal methods in this project, which often require multiple iterations to achieve high
coverage, thereby increasing the cost of iterative feedback.
Answer to RQ5
TestART demonstrates acceptable and controllable time and money cost, with 90.59%
of a single generation task completed within two minutes and the money cost for 100
generation tasks ranging from 0.3$-0.45$
6
DISCUSSION
• Potential of error detection capability. Error detection is one of the vital abilities of unit
test generation. Therefore, we adopt mutation testing to evaluate the mutation-killing ability of
TestART. As shown in the MC and TS columns of Table 5, TestART achieves a total of 53.11%
mutation coverage (MC) and 79.20% test strength (TS). TestART outperforms EvoSuite by 20%
in the error detection scene. This result demonstrates that TestART can effectively identify
mutation errors.
• Quality of assertion generation. The number of assertions in a test case is important for
measuring the quality of the test case. As shown in the last column of Table 5, the total number
of assertions generated by TestART exceeds that of ChatGPT-3.5 by 569. This demonstrates
that TestART not only improves the code coverage of test cases but also maintains a substantial
number of assertions, ensuring comprehensive test validation.
• Applied to real-world industrial applications. Unit test generation is widely used in the
industry, making it crucial to conduct evaluations using real-world industrial data. TestART has
already been integrated into Huawei’s programming plugins based on the internal model to
generate high-quality test cases. To further validate the effectiveness of TestART, we evaluate it on
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:20Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
the real-world industrial dataset2. We present the results detailed in Fig. 9. This figure illustrates
Pass, TBL and TLC on the Internal dataset. Notably, TestART outperforms ChatGPT-3.5
across all three metrics, with significant improvements of about 20% on Internal dataset.
This demonstrates that TestART is effective for both open-source datasets like Defects4J and the
industrial dataset.
7
THREATS TO VALIDITY
Baselines for comparison. The selection of baselines is one of the vital elements that threaten
validity. Because the essence of unit testing is code generation, this type of method keeps emerging
with diverse mechanisms. To alleviate this threat, we choose the state-of-the-art methods of four
kinds of solutions as baselines, including the SBST tool, DL-based method, LLMs, and LLM-based
approaches as the baselines, each empowered by different core engines.
Dataset Selection. The selection of the source code dataset is another threat. Due to the large
and varied datasets of unit tests, we chose three kinds of datasets (open-source, unlearned and
industrial) to mitigate the threat of this choice and ensure fairness. The unlearned and industrial
datasets are specifically employed to prevent data leakage from impacting the evaluation process.
LLMs Selection. The last threat is the choice of the core LLMs. Our TestART can be applied
to any interactive LLMs. We chose the most commonly and widely used LLM, ChatGPT-3.5, as
the core engine. Although ChatGPT-4 outperforms ChatGPT-3.5, TestART (based on ChatGPT-3.5)
achieves better results than ChatGPT-4. TestART has also been validated on other models, but we
have not made the results publicly available for commercial reasons
8
RELATED WORK
This section covers the work related to our proposal. We mainly introduce the automated unit test
generation approaches and automated program repair techniques.
8.1
Automated Unit Test Generation
Automated unit test generation significantly improves test efficiency. SBST [35] uses metaheuristic
search techniques (such as genetic algorithms) to automate or partially automate various testing
tasks. The core of this approach lies in defining a fitness function for the specific testing problem,
which guides the search algorithm to find effective solutions within a potentially infinite search
space. AthenaTest [52] uses a sequence-to-sequence transformer model to generate realistic, accu-
rate and human-readable unit test cases. A3Test [2] further enhances the passing rate of AthenaTest
by using a PLBART model verifying naming consistency and ensuring that test signatures match as-
sertion knowledge. However, they suffer from low pass rates and depend excessively on fine-tuned
datasets.
In recent years, LLMs have performed excellently on unit test generation. In the literature [19, 47,
50, 51, 58, 62], Researchers empirically investigate the characteristics of unit test cases generated
by large models and compare them with SBST tools, exploring the potential for combining the two
approaches. Most methods are based on fine-tuning LLMs [10, 27, 38, 42, 49, 63] based on the code
LLMs [25, 56] or are designed through prompt engineering [3, 4, 8, 21, 28, 41, 43, 46, 57, 61, 65].
As a representative work in the field, TESTPILOT [46] automatically generates unit test cases
for JavaScript programs without additional training or few-shot learning. The CODAMOSA [27]
proposed by Microsoft pioneers the combination of LLMs with SBST methods. ChatUnitTest [8]
develop the Generation-Validation-Repair framework to create an adaptive focal context that is
2Due to the confidential policy of the company, we used a closed-source model (e.g., ChatGPT-3.5) as a substitute for the
internal model to conduct evaluation, and hide the name of internal projects.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:21
integrated into prompts and then submitted to ChatGPT. ChatTester [65] first understands the
purpose of the focal method and then creates a unit test for it based on the help of the iterative
step of intention generation. HITS [57] proposes decomposing the method-to-test into slices
and generating unit tests slice by slice, applying the “divide-and-conquer” algorithm. TestART
demonstrates distinct advantages over ChatUnitTest [8] and ChatTester [65] in both repair strategies
and the iterative process. First, TestART’s repair mechanism employs carefully designed templates
derived from automated program repair (APR) research, enabling efficient automated repair of
typical compilation and runtime errors in LLM-generated test cases. In contrast, ChatTester relies
solely on unstable LLM-based error correction, while ChatUnitTest employs only basic syntactic
and import repair rules. Second, TestART implements a coverage-driven iterative process that
incrementally generates test cases through the co-evolution of generation and repair. This differs
fundamentally from ChatUnitTest’s non-iterative approach and ChatTester’s feedback mechanism
neglects coverage-guided information.
In addition, researchers focus on the understandability [12] by contextualizing test data, en-
hancing identifier names, and adding descriptive comments or measuring the readability [70] of
LLM-generated unit test cases. Shin et al. [48] investigate the efficacy of RAG-based LLMs in test
generation. In addition to mainstream research on Java unit testing, there are also approaches
for other languages. CLAP [55] is a Chat-like execution-based assert prediction for generating
meaningful assert statements for Python projects. Karanjai et al. [23] explore the capabilities of
generative models in crafting unit testing cases for parallel and high-performance software with
C++ parallel programs. To better evaluate the unit test generation methods, scholars have proposed
benchmarks [32, 69] to measure the capability of unit test generation. TestSpark [45] is a plugin
for IntelliJ IDEA that enables users to generate unit tests with only a few clicks directly within
their Integrated Development Environment (IDE). Among this, some researchers have also paid
attention to test case repair [29, 46, 63].
These methods often achieve reasonable coverage rates and generate test cases with high code
readability. Nevertheless, LLMs may face limitations such as getting stuck in compile and runtime
errors more frequently. Unlike previous works focusing more on the generation process, TestART
applies the APR technique to repair the errors in the generated test cases rather than regeneration
or direct LLM-based repair. TestART aims to improve pass and coverage rates by using repair
templates and coverage-guided testing feedback.
8.2
Automated Program Repair
In the literature, APR techniques are mainly categorized into four groups [17, 37, 67], i.e., heuristic-
based [26], constraint-based [59], template-based [31], and learning-based [64] repair techniques.
Our work is related to template-based APR, which is discussed below.
Template-based APR attempts to directly transform the buggy code into the correct one based on
pre-defined fix patterns and represents state-of-the-art [24, 31, 36, 68]. As the flagship work in this
field, TBar [31] systematically summarizes existing fix patterns and applies these patterns to patch
generation. Besides, FixMiner [24] leverages a three-fold clustering strategy to extract fix patterns
based on AST represent, and AVATAR [30] exploits fix pattern of static analysis tools to generate
patches. Recently, inspired by the potential of combing fix patterns and LLMs, GAMMA [68] frames
APR as a fill-in-the-blank task by querying LLMs to directly recover the correct code for masked
cod with the code context. According to ReAssert [11], repairing unit tests by empirical strategies
is effective and acceptable for developers. However, this strategy is not for test cases generated
from LLMs.
Therefore, to increase test case passing rates, TestART designs a template-driven repair strategy
that is adaptive to LLM outputs inspired by the APR community. Unlike template-based APR
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:22Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
techniques, which usually focus on semantic bugs from production code, TestART attempts to design
simple and efficient templates to repair the typical compilation and runtime errors from test cases
automatically generated by LLMs. More importantly, TestART implements the co-evolution between
the generation and repair process to generate high-quality test cases under several iterations.
9
CONCLUSION
This paper presents TestART, the first approach to integrate the traditional automated repair tech-
nique with the generative capabilities of LLMs through an innovative co-evolutionary framework
for generating high-quality unit test cases. TestART also introduces positive prompt injection and
coverage-guided testing feedback to mitigate the effects of faithfulness hallucinations in LLMs
and enhance the sufficiency of test cases. TestART significantly outperforms existing methods,
showing an 18% increase in passing rate and a 20% enhancement in coverage rate on tested methods,
marking substantial improvements over the capabilities of previous works. Although TestART
is experimented on the ChatGPT-3.5 model, it is superior to the ChatGPT-4.0 model and can be
implemented in other LLMs. TestART shows excellent performance on both open-source datasets
and industrial datasets. This indicates that TestART effectively leverages LLMs’ strengths while
mitigating their weaknesses, leading to more effective, reliable, and higher-quality unit tests.
10
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported partially by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61932012,
62372228), and CCF-Huawei Populus Grove Fund (CCF-HuaweiSE202304, CCF-HuaweiSY202306).
11
DATA AVAILABILITY
Our experimental materials are available at https://github.com/sikygu/TestART.
REFERENCES
[1] Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2021. Unified Pre-training for Program
Understanding and Generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. 2655–2668.
[2] Saranya Alagarsamy, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, and Aldeida Aleti. 2024. A3test: Assertion-augmented automated
test case generation. Information and Software Technology 176 (2024), 107565.
[3] Saranya Alagarsamy, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Chetan Arora, and Aldeida Aleti. 2024. Enhancing Large Language
Models for Text-to-Testcase Generation. CoRR abs/2402.11910 (2024).
[4] Nadia Alshahwan, Jubin Chheda, Anastasia Finogenova, Beliz Gokkaya, Mark Harman, Inna Harper, Alexandru
Marginean, Shubho Sengupta, and Eddy Wang. 2024. Automated Unit Test Improvement using Large Language Models
at Meta. In Companion Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering.
185–196.
[5] James H Andrews, Tim Menzies, and Felix CH Li. 2011. Genetic algorithms for randomized unit testing. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering 37, 1 (2011), 80–94.
[6] Luciano Baresi and Matteo Miraz. 2010. Testful: Automatic unit-test generation for java classes. In 2010 ACM/IEEE
32nd International Conference on Software Engineering, Vol. 2. 281–284.
[7] Shreya Bhatia, Tarushi Gandhi, Dhruv Kumar, and Pankaj Jalote. 2024. Unit test generation using generative ai: A
comparative performance analysis of autogeneration tools. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Large
Language Models for Code. 54–61.
[8] Yinghao Chen, Zehao Hu, Chen Zhi, Junxiao Han, Shuiguang Deng, and Jianwei Yin. 2024. ChatUniTest: A Framework
for LLM-Based Test Generation. In Companion Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on the Foundations
of Software Engineering. 572–576.
[9] Eunbi Choi, Yongrae Jo, Joel Jang, and Minjoon Seo. 2022. Prompt Injection: Parameterization of Fixed Inputs. CoRR
abs/2206.11349 (2022).
[10] Arghavan Moradi Dakhel, Amin Nikanjam, Vahid Majdinasab, Foutse Khomh, and Michel C. Desmarais. 2024. Effective
test generation using pre-trained Large Language Models and mutation testing. Information and Software Technology
171 (2024), 107468.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:23
[11] Brett Daniel, Vilas Jagannath, Danny Dig, and Darko Marinov. 2009. ReAssert: Suggesting Repairs for Broken Unit
Tests. In ASE 2009, 24th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, Auckland, New Zealand,
November 16-20, 2009. IEEE Computer Society, 433–444.
[12] Amirhossein Deljouyi, Roham Koohestani, Maliheh Izadi, and Andy Zaidman. 2024. Leveraging Large Language
Models for Enhancing the Understandability of Generated Unit Tests. CoRR abs/2408.11710 (2024).
[13] Pouria Derakhshanfar, Xavier Devroey, and Andy Zaidman. 2022. Basic block coverage for search-based unit testing
and crash reproduction. Empirical Software Engineering 27, 7 (2022), 192–206.
[14] Gordon Fraser and Andrea Arcuri. 2011. Evosuite: automatic test suite generation for object-oriented software.
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT symposium and the 13th European conference on Foundations of software
engineering. 416–419.
[15] Gordon Fraser and Andreas Zeller. 2010. Mutation-driven generation of unit tests and oracles. In Proceedings of the
19th international symposium on Software testing and analysis. 147–158.
[16] Sepideh Kashefi Gargari and Mohammd Reza Keyvanpour. 2021. SBST challenges from the perspective of the test
techniques. In 2021 12th International Conference on Information and Knowledge Technology. IEEE, 119–123.
[17] Luca Gazzola, Daniela Micucci, and Leonardo Mariani. 2019. Automatic Software Repair: A Survey. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering 45, 1 (2019), 34–67.
[18] Mark Harman and Bryan F Jones. 2001. Search-based software engineering. Information and Software Technology 43,
14 (2001), 833–839.
[19] Dong Huang, Jie M. Zhang, Mingzhe Du, Mark Harman, and Heming Cui. 2024. Rethinking the Influence of Source
Code on Test Case Generation. CoRR abs/2409.09464 (2024).
[20] Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen, Weihua Peng,
Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al. 2023. A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy,
challenges, and open questions. CoRR abs/2311.05232 (2023), 1–49.
[21] Zongze Jiang, Ming Wen, Jialun Cao, Xuanhua Shi, and Hai Jin. 2024. Towards Understanding the Effectiveness of Large
Language Models on Directed Test Input Generation. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering. 1408–1420.
[22] René Just, Darioush Jalali, and Michael D Ernst. 2014. Defects4J: A database of existing faults to enable controlled
testing studies for Java programs. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Symposium on Software testing and Analysis.
437–440.
[23] Rabimba Karanjai, Aftab Hussain, Md. Rafiqul Islam Rabin, Lei Xu, Weidong Shi, and Mohammad Amin Alipour.
2024. Harnessing the Power of LLMs: Automating Unit Test Generation for High-Performance Computing. CoRR
abs/2407.05202 (2024).
[24] Anil Koyuncu, Kui Liu, Tegawendé F Bissyandé, Dongsun Kim, Jacques Klein, Martin Monperrus, and Yves Le Traon.
2020. Fixminer: Mining Relevant Fix Patterns for Automated Program Repair. Empirical Software Engineering 25, 3
(2020), 1980–2024.
[25] Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Chu Hong Hoi. 2022. Coderl: Mastering
code generation through pretrained models and deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 35 (2022), 21314–21328.
[26] Claire Le Goues, ThanhVu Nguyen, Stephanie Forrest, and Westley Weimer. 2012. Genprog: A Generic Method for
Automatic Software Repair. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 38, 01 (2012), 54–72.
[27] Caroline Lemieux, Jeevana Priya Inala, Shuvendu K. Lahiri, and Siddhartha Sen. 2023. CodaMosa: Escaping Coverage
Plateaus in Test Generation with Pre-trained Large Language Models. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference
on Software Engineering. 919–931.
[28] Vincent Li and Nick Doiron. 2023. Prompting Code Interpreter to Write Better Unit Tests on Quixbugs Functions.
CoRR abs/2310.00483 (2023).
[29] Jun Liu, Jiwei Yan, Yuanyuan Xie, Jun Yan, and Jian Zhang. 2024. Augmenting LLMs to Repair Obsolete Test Cases
with Static Collector and Neural Reranker. CoRR abs/2407.03625 (2024).
[30] Kui Liu, Anil Koyuncu, Dongsun Kim, and Tegawendé F Bissyandé. 2019. Avatar: Fixing semantic bugs with fix
patterns of static analysis violations. In 26th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering.
IEEE, 1–12.
[31] Kui Liu, Anil Koyuncu, Dongsun Kim, and Tegawendé F Bissyandé. 2019. Tbar: Revisiting Template-based Automated
Program Repair. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis.
31–42.
[32] Andrea Lops, Fedelucio Narducci, Azzurra Ragone, Michelantonio Trizio, and Claudio Bartolini. 2024. A System for
Automated Unit Test Generation Using Large Language Models and Assessment of Generated Test Suites. CoRR
abs/2408.07846 (2024).
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


1:24Siqi Gu, Quanjun Zhang, Kecheng Li, Chunrong Fang, Fangyuan Tian, Liuchuan Zhu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen
[33] Stephan Lukasczyk and Gordon Fraser. 2022. Pynguin: Automated unit test generation for python. In Proceedings of
the ACM/IEEE 44th International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings. 168–172.
[34] Lei Ma, Cyrille Artho, Cheng Zhang, Hiroyuki Sato, Johannes Gmeiner, and Rudolf Ramler. 2015. Grt: Program-
analysis-guided random testing (t). In 30th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering.
IEEE, 212–223.
[35] Phil McMinn. 2004. Search-based software test data generation: a survey. Software Testing, Verification & Reliability 14,
2 (2004), 105–156.
[36] Martin Monperrus. 2014. A critical review of "automatic patch generation learned from human-written patches": essay
on the problem statement and the evaluation of automatic software repair. In Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Software Engineering. 234–242.
[37] Martin Monperrus. 2018. Automatic Software Repair: A Bibliography. Comput. Surveys 51, 1 (2018), 1–24.
[38] Chao Ni, Xiaoya Wang, Liushan Chen, Dehai Zhao, Zhengong Cai, Shaohua Wang, and Xiaohu Yang. 2024. CasModaTest:
A Cascaded and Model-agnostic Self-directed Framework for Unit Test Generation. CoRR abs/2406.15743 (2024).
[39] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. CoRR abs/2303.08774 (2023).
[40] Carlos Pacheco, Shuvendu K Lahiri, Michael D Ernst, and Thomas Ball. 2007. Feedback-directed random test generation.
In 29th International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE, 75–84.
[41] Juan Altmayer Pizzorno and Emery D. Berger. 2024. CoverUp: Coverage-Guided LLM-Based Test Generation. CoRR
abs/2403.16218 (2024).
[42] Laura Plein, Wendkûuni C. Ouédraogo, Jacques Klein, and Tegawendé F. Bissyandé. 2024. Automatic Generation of
Test Cases based on Bug Reports: a Feasibility Study with Large Language Models. In ICSE Companion. 360–361.
[43] Gabriel Ryan, Siddhartha Jain, Mingyue Shang, Shiqi Wang, Xiaofei Ma, Murali Krishna Ramanathan, and Baishakhi
Ray. 2024. Code-Aware Prompting: A Study of Coverage-Guided Test Generation in Regression Setting using LLM.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1, FSE (2024), 951–971.
[44] Abdelilah Sakti, Gilles Pesant, and Yann-Gaël Guéhéneuc. 2014. Instance generator and problem representation to
improve object oriented code coverage. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 41, 3 (2014), 294–313.
[45] Arkadii Sapozhnikov, Mitchell Olsthoorn, Annibale Panichella, Vladimir Kovalenko, and Pouria Derakhshanfar. 2024.
TestSpark: IntelliJ IDEA’s Ultimate Test Generation Companion. In ICSE Companion. 30–34.
[46] Max Schäfer, Sarah Nadi, Aryaz Eghbali, and Frank Tip. 2023. Adaptive test generation using a large language model.
CoRR abs/2302.06527 (2023), 1–21.
[47] Max Schäfer, Sarah Nadi, Aryaz Eghbali, and Frank Tip. 2024. An Empirical Evaluation of Using Large Language
Models for Automated Unit Test Generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 50, 1 (2024), 85–105. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2023.3334955
[48] Jiho Shin, Reem Aleithan, Hadi Hemmati, and Song Wang. 2024. Retrieval-Augmented Test Generation: How Far Are
We? CoRR abs/2409.12682 (2024).
[49] Jiho Shin, Sepehr Hashtroudi, Hadi Hemmati, and Song Wang. 2024. Domain Adaptation for Code Model-Based
Unit Test Case Generation. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis. 1211–1222.
[50] Mohammed Latif Siddiq, Joanna C. S. Santos, Ridwanul Hasan Tanvir, Noshin Ulfat, Fahmid Al Rifat, and Vinicius Car-
valho Lopes. 2023. Exploring the Effectiveness of Large Language Models in Generating Unit Tests. CoRR abs/2305.00418
(2023).
[51] Yutian Tang, Zhijie Liu, Zhichao Zhou, and Xiapu Luo. 2024. ChatGPT vs SBST: A Comparative Assessment of Unit
Test Suite Generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 50, 6 (2024), 1340–1359.
[52] Michele Tufano, Dawn Drain, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shao Kun Deng, and Neel Sundaresan. 2020. Unit test case
generation with transformers and focal context. CoRR abs/2009.05617 (2020), 1–15.
[53] Michele Tufano, Dawn Drain, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shao Kun Deng, and Neel Sundaresan. 2020. Unit test case
generation with transformers and focal context. CoRR abs/2009.05617 (2020), 1–15.
[54] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems. 6000–6010.
[55] Han Wang, Han Hu, Chunyang Chen, and Burak Turhan. 2024. Chat-like Asserts Prediction with the Support of Large
Language Model. CoRR abs/2407.21429 (2024).
[56] Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven C.H. Hoi. 2021. CodeT5: Identifier-aware Unified Pre-trained Encoder-
Decoder Models for Code Understanding and Generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing. 8696–8708.
[57] Zejun Wang, Kaibo Liu, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2024. HITS: High-coverage LLM-based Unit Test Generation via Method
Slicing. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering. 1258–1268.
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.


TestART: Improving LLM-based Unit Testing via Co-evolution of Automated Generation and Repair Iteration
1:25
[58] Danni Xiao, Yimeng Guo, Yanhui Li, and Lin Chen. 2024. Optimizing Search-Based Unit Test Generation with Large
Language Models:An Empirical Study. In Internetware.
[59] Yingfei Xiong, Jie Wang, Runfa Yan, Jiachen Zhang, Shi Han, Gang Huang, and Lu Zhang. 2017. Precise Condition
Synthesis for Program Repair. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering.
IEEE, 416–426.
[60] Jin Xu, Xiaojiang Liu, Jianhao Yan, Deng Cai, Huayang Li, and Jian Li. 2022. Learning to break the loop: Analyzing
and mitigating repetitions for neural text generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022),
3082–3095.
[61] Chen Yang, Junjie Chen, Bin Lin, Jianyi Zhou, and Ziqi Wang. 2024. Enhancing LLM-based Test Generation for
Hard-to-Cover Branches via Program Analysis. CoRR abs/2404.04966 (2024).
[62] Lin Yang, Chen Yang, Shutao Gao, Weijing Wang, Bo Wang, Qihao Zhu, Xiao Chu, Jianyi Zhou, Guangtai Liang,
Qianxiang Wang, and Junjie Chen. 2024. An Empirical Study of Unit Test Generation with Large Language Models.
CoRR abs/2406.18181 (2024).
[63] Ahmadreza Saboor Yaraghi, Darren Holden, Nafiseh Kahani, and Lionel C. Briand. 2024. Automated Test Case Repair
Using Language Models. CoRR abs/2401.06765 (2024).
[64] Wei Yuan, Quanjun Zhang, Tieke He, Chunrong Fang, Nguyen Quoc Viet Hung, Xiaodong Hao, and Hongzhi Yin.
2022. CIRCLE: Continual repair across programming languages. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 678–690.
[65] Zhiqiang Yuan, Mingwei Liu, Shiji Ding, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. 2024. Evaluating and
Improving ChatGPT for Unit Test Generation. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1, FSE (2024), 1703–1726.
[66] Minghui Zhang, Alex Sokolov, Weixin Cai, and Si-Qing Chen. 2023. Multi-aspect Repetition Suppression and Content
Moderation of Large Language Models. CoRR abs/2304.10611 (2023).
[67] Quanjun Zhang, Chunrong Fang, Yuxiang Ma, Weisong Sun, and Zhenyu Chen. 2023. A survey of learning-based
automated program repair. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 33, 2 (2023), 1–69.
[68] Quanjun Zhang, Chunrong Fang, Tongke Zhang, Bowen Yu, Weisong Sun, and Zhenyu Chen. 2023. Gamma: Revisiting
template-based automated program repair via mask prediction. In 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering. IEEE, 535–547.
[69] Quanjun Zhang, Ye Shang, Chunrong Fang, Siqi Gu, Jianyi Zhou, and Zhenyu Chen. 2024. TestBench: Evaluating
Class-Level Test Case Generation Capability of Large Language Models. CoRR abs/2409.17561 (2024).
[70] Zhichao Zhou, Yutian Tang, Yun Lin, and Jingzhu He. 2024. An LLM-based Readability Measurement for Unit Tests’
Context-aware Inputs. CoRR abs/2407.21369 (2024).
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 1. Publication date: 2025.