AutoSafeCoder: A Multi-Agent Framework for
Securing LLM Code Generation through
Static Analysis and Fuzz Testing
Ana Nunez∗
University of Texas at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas, 78249, USA
ana.nunez@utsa.edu
Nafis Tanveer Islam
University of Amsterdam
1012 WP Amsterdam, Netherlands
n.t.islam@uva.nl
Sumit Jha
Florida International University
Miami, Florida, 33199, USA
sjha@fiu.edu
Paul Rad∗
University of Texas at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas, 78249, USA
peyman.najafirad@utsa.edu
Abstract
Recent advancements in automatic code generation using large language models
(LLMs) have brought us closer to fully automated secure software development.
However, existing approaches often rely on a single agent for code generation,
which struggles to produce secure, vulnerability-free code. Traditional program
synthesis with LLMs has primarily focused on functional correctness, often ne-
glecting critical dynamic security implications that happen during runtime. To
address these challenges, we propose AutoSafeCoder, a multi-agent framework
that leverages LLM-driven agents for code generation, vulnerability analysis, and
security enhancement through continuous collaboration. The framework consists
of three agents: a Coding Agent responsible for code generation, a Static Analyzer
Agent identifying vulnerabilities, and a Fuzzing Agent performing dynamic testing
using a mutation-based fuzzing approach to detect runtime errors. Our contribution
focuses on ensuring the safety of multi-agent code generation by integrating dy-
namic and static testing in an iterative process during code generation by LLM that
improves security. Experiments using the SecurityEval dataset demonstrate a 13%
reduction in code vulnerabilities compared to baseline LLMs, with no compromise
in functionality.
1
Introduction
Software vulnerabilities—security flaws, glitches, or weaknesses in systems—pose significant risks,
often exploited by attackers for malicious purposes [1]. A recent report from IBM research estimates
that these vulnerabilities cost companies an average of $3.9 million annually [2]. Globally, the cost of
security breaches is projected to exceed $1.75 trillion between 2021 and 2025 [3]. With the growing
integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) into the software development lifecycle [4], studies
show that their use as coding assistants can increase the occurrence of vulnerabilities by 10% [5],
raising new concerns about the security implications of LLM-driven code generation [6].
While code generated by LLMs excel in functional correctness, they often produce code with security
issues [5, 7]. Although this democratization of coding using LLMs has increased the developers’
∗Secure AI and Autonomy Laboratory, University of Texas at San Antonio
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
arXiv:2409.10737v2  [cs.SE]  5 Nov 2024


productivity by enabling more people to engage in programming [8, 9], code produced by large
language models often fails to meet software security standards, potentially containing vulnerabilities
in around 40% of cases. [10]. This evaluation was reused in [11], which further found that other
state-of-the-art Language Models [12, 13] have similar concerning security levels as Copilot [14].
Another study in [15] found that in 16 out of 21 security-relevant cases, ChatGPT generates code
below minimal security standards.
In order to mitigate the risks of using LLMs as an assistant to developers, it is crucial to analyze the
static and dynamic vulnerabilities in code before they are passed to the developer. Code vulnerabilities
pose significant risks, making it crucial to assist developers in mitigating these issues. While efforts
like VUDDY [16], MVP [17], and Movery [18] have focused on identifying Vulnerable Code Clones
(VCC), they generally overlook vulnerability repair. Recent work has demonstrated the potential
of pre-trained LLMs for automating this process [19], but research such as VulRepair [20] and
AIBUGHUNTER [21] lacks dynamic execution-based techniques to assess whether LLM-generated
code is vulnerable. Additionally, while dynamic analysis tools exist, they often focus on functionality
without addressing security concerns.
To address the challenges of generating secure code while ensuring functionality during software
development, we propose a multi-agent solution to create safe and functionally correct code by having
a static analysis review agent, a fuzzing agent, and a coding agent that receives feedback from both
agents. Our work focuses on the Python programming language since it is one of the most popular
languages [22, 23] among developers. Hence, we propose a three-tier system consisting of a Coding
Agent, a Static Analyzer Agent, and an Fuzzing Agent to generate, detect, and repair vulnerabilities
using a multi-agent system powered by GPT4 for code generation as well as static and dynamic
analysis of source code using a multi-agent based system.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are:
• We introduce a new multi-agent system leveraging large language models (LLMs) to generate
secure and correct-by-construction code autonomously. Our system combines feedback
from static analysis and a fuzzing agent that performs dynamic code analysis.
• We apply few-shot learning and in-context learning techniques within the LLM framework,
enabling agents to identify vulnerabilities in a continuous feedback loop effectively.
• We provide a comprehensive evaluation, demonstrating both the efficiency and security of
the collaborative code generation system, supported by both quantitative and qualitative
evaluations.
2
Related Work
2.1
Multi-Agent Systems for Code Generation
Several innovative multi-agent code generation approaches driven by large language models (LLMs)
[24, 25, 26, 27, 28] have recently emerged in software development. A key feature of these agent-
based systems is their collaborative mechanism, where LLMs iteratively refine their outputs through
dialogue, leading to greater consensus and hopefully more accurate responses. These systems
assign agents specific roles, such as programmers or designers, and some incorporate Standardized
Operating Procedures (SOPs) as a communication protocol to enhance coordination [26]. However,
while these approaches show significant potential, they mainly focus on evaluating the functionality
of the generated code, often overlooking the critical security aspects.
2.2
Static and Dynamic Analysis
Static analysis methods, such as those using Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) [29] or deep learning
approaches [20], help identify issues by analyzing source code without execution. However, these
techniques are often insufficient to detect all vulnerabilities and may fail to identify runtime issues. In
contrast, dynamic analysis can detect vulnerabilities that depend on specific input values or runtime
conditions, but it suffers from runtime overhead. Recently, new approaches for dynamic testing, deep
learning libraries, and compilers have emerged [30, 31]. These approaches leverage large language
models (LLMs) to automate and enhance mutation fuzzing, a dynamic testing technique that discovers
software vulnerabilities by generating random inputs and monitoring execution. Thus, both static and
2


Figure 1: Overview of our multi-agent framework integrating three agents: i) Coding Agent, ii) Static
Analyzer Agent, and iii) Fuzzing Agent. The process begins with the Coding Agent generating code
from code requirements. The Static Analyzer Agent performs code auditing. The Fuzzing Agent then
mutates inputs to identify potential crashes. Any errors are fed back to the Coding Agent for further
revisions.
dynamic testing are essential for a thorough vulnerability assessment, as static analysis captures early
coding flaws while dynamic analysis identifies issues that surface during execution.
3
Methodology
Our approach introduces a multi-agent framework to enhance code generation security by integrating
static and dynamic analysis through multiple agents driven by large language models (LLMs). This
section outlines our agents and their interactions, as illustrated in Figure 1. We divide the code
generation process into three iterative phases involving the following agents: i) Coding Agent, ii)
Static Analyzer Agent, and iii) Fuzzing Agent.
The process starts with the Coding Agent, which generates initial code based on code requirements
or descriptions. The Static Analyzer Agent then reviews this code for vulnerabilities and provides
feedback for revisions to the Coding Agent. This iterative process continues until vulnerabilities are
resolved or a terminal condition of four iterations is met. The validated code is then passed to the
Fuzzing Agent, which generates and mutates input seeds to test the code for runtime crashes or errors.
Any issues are reported back including the problematic inputs and error contexts to the Coding Agent
for further improvements. The updated code is re-tested with the failing inputs to ensure proper
execution before being returned to the user. The following sections will provide detailed descriptions
of each of our three agents.
3


3.1
Coding Agent
The Coding Agent is an LLM-driven tool designed for both code generation and code repair, powered
by GPT-4. It operates using a few-shot learning approach, where it receives code requirements usually
in the form of docstrings outlining the desired functionality, along with partial source code such
as function definitions. Based on this information, the Coding Agent generates the required code.
However, code produced by LLMs may still have security vulnerabilities [32]; this is similar to a
human programmer inadvertently producing vulnerable code. To address these issues, the Coding
Agent modifies the code based on feedback from specialized agents. It iteratively receives input from
the Static Analyzer Agent and the Fuzzing Agent until all vulnerabilities are resolved and no further
issues are detected or until the limit of iterations is reached.
3.2
Static Analyzer Agent
The next agent, also powered by GPT-4, is the Static Analyzer Agent. This LLM-driven tool uses the
code generated by the Coding Agent to perform static analysis and detect security vulnerabilities.
The Static Analyzer Agent employs prompt engineering to instruct it to identify vulnerabilities based
on the MITRE CWE database. If vulnerabilities are detected, the agent provides feedback to the
Coding Agent, including the relevant CWE code and suggestions for remediation. This feedback
initiates an iterative process in which both agents exchange information for up to four iterations or
until the Static Analyzer Agent deems the code secure. Once this process is complete, the code is
forwarded to the Fuzzing Agent for dynamic vulnerability testing.
3.3
Fuzzing Agent
The primary objective of the Fuzzing agent is to generate diverse inputs for execution-driven dynamic
testing of the generated code. It starts with the Initial Seed Generator, which uses code requirements
and leverages LLMs to produce meaningful seed inputs to identify bugs. Once generated, these seeds
undergo type-aware mutation [33] to iteratively produce fuzzing inputs.
The fuzzing seed inputs generated throughout the fuzzing loop are used to assess system behavior
and detect crashes, which indicate potential bugs. Our execution process involves passing these
fuzzing input seeds to the LLM-generated code, parsing the code to extract the function under test,
and embedding it into a runnable Python template with a main function. After each run, the exit
code is analyzed to detect crashes. Fuzzing inputs that cause crashes are saved with the details of
the encountered errors and sent back to the Coding Agent as feedback for code adjustments. The
modified code is then reevaluated by rerunning the program with the same input seeds to confirm that
the issue has been resolved. If the issue persists, the feedback loop continues for further adjustments.
To generate valid and effective input, we utilize a type-aware mutation strategy based on the data
type of each parameter. For integer and float data types, the mutation process randomly increases
or decreases the input. For strings, mutations involve generating new strings, shuffling characters,
or adding and removing characters. For boolean data types, a random boolean value is returned. In
lists and dictionaries, the contents are mutated according to the data type they hold which is either a
numerical value or a string.
4
Experiments
4.1
Dataset
We use SecurityEval [34] to assess the security of generated code. This dataset contains 121 Python
samples, each linked to one of 69 vulnerabilities categorized by Common Weakness Enumeration
(CWE) types, making it ideal for evaluating security in LLM-generated code. For functionality
testing, we use HumanEval [35], a benchmark dataset with handwritten prompts from competitive
programming. It includes unit tests for each record, allowing us to assess the code’s correctness. We
measure functional accuracy using the pass@k metric [35].
4


Table 1: (a) Number of vulnerable code samples generated by GPT-4o and our AutoSafeCoder (b)
Performance of the Fuzzing Agent (c) Comparison of functionality for code generated by GPT-4o
and AutoSafeCoder using Pass@1
(a) Code Generation Approach
Comparison
(b) Fixes by Fuzzing Agent
(c) Functionality Eval.
Approach
Vul. Code Gen.
Fix Status
No. of Samples
Approach
Pass@1
GPT-4o
59/121 (49%)
No Crash
60 (47%)
GPT-4o
0.9085
AutoSafeCoder
44/121 (36%)
Fixed
5 (4%)
AutoSafeCoder
0.8780
4.2
Experimental Setup
In our experiments, we evaluated the multi-agent framework using GPT-4o model provided by
OpenAI [36] for the LLM agents. The Static Analysis Agent provides feedback until the code is
analyzed as secure or after four communication rounds. We configured the fuzzing mutation loop
to run for 150 iterations. To execute the code in a separate process, we used the ‘multiprocessing’
Python library. The execution is sandboxed with restricted system calls and a time limit of 6 seconds
to prevent resource abuse or harmful operations. The sandbox is configured with Python 3.10.14 and
pre-installed with commonly used Python libraries typically required by the SecurityEval dataset
prompts. The running time of the experiment was of 45 minutes and was run on a computer with Red
Hat Enterprise Linux 8.10 and a Tesla V100S GPU with 32GB of GPU memory and 376GB main
memory.
4.3
Results and Discussions
To illustrate our approach, we use GPT-4o as a baseline and employ Bandit [29] to identify security
vulnerabilities in code from both methods. Table 1 (a) shows the number of vulnerable code
snippets detected by Bandit. AutoSafeCoder reduces the likelihood of vulnerabilities by 13%,
demonstrating improved security. The multi-agent framework outperforms GPT-4o by mitigating
more vulnerabilities, highlighting the advantages of integrating static and dynamic analysis agents.
Further looking into Bandit’s results, it shows a recurring vulnerability CWE-94. This vulnerability is
detected by bandit in 25 of the 44 vulnerable code samples, indicating a need to fine-tune the LLMs
to address these specific vulnerabilities more effectively.
We evaluated our approach’s effectiveness in fixing vulnerable code, as shown in Table 2. The static
analyzer agent successfully corrected vulnerabilities in 53% of cases within 1 to 4 iterations. Table 1
(b) shows that the Fuzzing Agent processed 65 samples, with 60 running without crashes detected,
and 5 with crashes successfully fixed. We believe using a more robust fuzzer like Python-AFL [37]
and extending fuzzing iterations could improve this rate even further. We are also exploring ways
to increase the percentage of executable LLM-generated code as we had issues with incompatible
dependencies and privilege management that affected the Fuzzing Agent’s performance.
Table 2: Contribution of the static analyzer agent. This table shows the number of code samples
successfully fixed through feedback provided by the static analyzer agent, categorized by the number
of iterations required.
Number of Iterations to Fix Code
Number of Samples
No Iterations Required
19 (16%)
1 Iteration Required
25 (22%)
2 Iteration Required
20 (17%)
3 Iteration Required
12 (10%)
4 Iteration Required
6 (4%)
Unable to Fully Fix
39 (31%)
Finally, we assessed the functionality of our code using HumanEval. As shown in Tabe 1 (c), while
our multi-agent system focuses on generating secure code, it maintains functionality with only a 3%
decrease compared to GPT-4o, demonstrating a successful balance between enhanced security and
5


high functionality. We are currently exploring ways for adding a functional testing agent to verify
correctness of generated code in AutoSafeCoder.
5
Conclusions
We introduced AutoSafeCoder, a multi-agent framework that enhances automated code generation
with focus on static and dynamic security analysis. Unlike traditional single-agent approaches,
AutoSafeCoder integrates multiple agents, including a Coding Agent for code generation, a Static
Analyzer for vulnerability detection, and a Fuzzing Agent for dynamic testing using mutation-based
fuzzing. This iterative process ensures that vulnerabilities are detected and addressed through real-
time analysis during code execution. Our experiments on the SecurityEval dataset demonstrated a
13% reduction in vulnerabilities compared to baseline LLMs.
6
Social Impact Statement
Code is the foundation of modern society, powering communication, healthcare, and transportation.
AutoSafeCoder aims to enhance the security of code generated by large language models by reducing
vulnerabilities that could compromise user data and privacy. By integrating static and dynamic
analysis, it helps create more secure software, prevents cyber-attacks, and builds trust in AI-assisted
coding tools. However, potential negative impacts exist. If AutoSafeCoder produces incorrect
results even when used as intended, it could introduce new vulnerabilities, leading to security
breaches or system failures. Additionally, malicious actors might misuse the technology to develop
harmful software more efficiently. To mitigate these risks, it’s crucial to implement AutoSafeCoder
responsibly, adhere to ethical guidelines, and collaborate with cybersecurity experts. Our code and
outcome by our proposed agent are available here https://github.com/SecureAIAutonomyLab/
AutoSafeCoder.
References
[1] Kelley Dempsey, Paul Eavy, and George Moore. Automation support for security control
assessments. Vol. 1: Overview, pages 8011–1, 2017.
[2] IBM. https://newsroom.ibm.com/2020-07-29-IBM-Report-Compromised-Employee-Accounts-
Led-to-Most-Expensive-Data-Breaches-Over-Past-Year, 2020.
[3] C. Ventures. https://cybersecurityventures.com/cybersecurity-spending-2021-2025/.
[4] Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan,
Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, et al. Code llama: Open foundation
models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
[5] Gustavo Sandoval, Hammond Pearce, Teo Nys, Ramesh Karri, Siddharth Garg, and Brendan
Dolan-Gavitt. Lost at c: A user study on the security implications of large language model code
assistants. In USENIX Security. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.09727, 2023.
[6] Sanka Rasnayaka, Guanlin Wang, Ridwan Shariffdeen, and Ganesh Neelakanta Iyer. An
empirical study on usage and perceptions of llms in a software engineering project. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.16186, 2024.
[7] Hammond Pearce, Benjamin Tan, Baleegh Ahmad, Ramesh Karri, and Brendan Dolan-Gavitt.
Examining zero-shot vulnerability repair with large language models. In 2023 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 1–18. IEEE Computer Society, 2022.
[8] Jukka Niiranen. Democratizing code, https://jukkaniiranen.com/2021/04/democratizing-code/.
[9] AKILEK Akilek Consulting. Democratizing programming: How ai enables everyone to become
a programmer, https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/democratizing-programming-how-ai-enables-
everyone-become/.
6


[10] Hammond Pearce, Baleegh Ahmad, Benjamin Tan, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Ramesh Karri.
Asleep at the keyboard? assessing the security of github copilot’s code contributions. In 2022
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 754–768. IEEE, 2022.
[11] Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao
Mou, Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be
with you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023.
[12] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program
synthesis. ICLR, 2023.
[13] Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi, Ruiqi Zhong,
Wen-tau Yih, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Incoder: A generative model for code infilling
and synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05999, 2022.
[14] GitHub.
Github copilot: Your ai pair programmer.
https://github.com/features/
copilot, 2023. Accessed: 2024-09-12.
[15] Raphaël Khoury, Anderson R Avila, Jacob Brunelle, and Baba Mamadou Camara. How secure
is code generated by chatgpt? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09655, 2023.
[16] Seulbae Kim, Seunghoon Woo, Heejo Lee, and Hakjoo Oh. Vuddy: A scalable approach for
vulnerable code clone discovery. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages
595–614. IEEE, 2017.
[17] Yang Xiao, Bihuan Chen, Chendong Yu, Zhengzi Xu, Zimu Yuan, Feng Li, Binghong Liu,
Yang Liu, Wei Huo, Wei Zou, et al. {MVP}: Detecting vulnerabilities using {Patch-Enhanced}
vulnerability signatures. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20), pages
1165–1182, 2020.
[18] Seunghoon Woo, Hyunji Hong, Eunjin Choi, and Heejo Lee. {MOVERY}: A precise ap-
proach for modified vulnerable code clone discovery from modified {Open-Source} software
components. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22), pages 3037–3053,
2022.
[19] Quanjun Zhang, Chunrong Fang, Bowen Yu, Weisong Sun, Tongke Zhang, and Zhenyu Chen.
Pre-trained model-based automated software vulnerability repair: How far are we?
IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2023.
[20] Michael Fu, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Trung Le, Van Nguyen, and Dinh Phung. Vulrepair:
a t5-based automated software vulnerability repair. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering, pages 935–947, 2022.
[21] Michael Fu, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Trung Le, Yuki Kume, Van Nguyen, Dinh Phung, and
John Grundy. Aibughunter: A practical tool for predicting, classifying and repairing software
vulnerabilities. Empirical Software Engineering, 29(1):4, 2024.
[22] Stephen Cass.
The top programming languages 2024.
https://spectrum.ieee.org/
top-programming-languages-2024, 2022. Accessed: 2024-09-12.
[23] Stack
Overflow.
Stack
overflow
developer
survey
2024:
Most
popular
technologies.
https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2024/technology#
most-popular-technologies-language-other, 2024. Accessed: 2024-09-12.
[24] Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize
Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Chatdev:
Communicative agents for software development, 2024.
[25] Dong Huang, Jie M. Zhang, Michael Luck, Qingwen Bu, Yuhao Qing, and Heming Cui.
Agentcoder: Multi-agent-based code generation with iterative testing and optimisation, 2024.
7


[26] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang,
Jinlin Wang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng
Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent
collaborative framework, 2023.
[27] Md. Ashraful Islam, Mohammed Eunus Ali, and Md Rizwan Parvez. Mapcoder: Multi-agent
code generation for competitive problem solving, 2024.
[28] Yoichi Ishibashi and Yoshimasa Nishimura. Self-organized agents: A llm multi-agent framework
toward ultra large-scale code generation and optimization, 2024.
[29] PyCQA. Bandit. https://github.com/PyCQA/bandit/tree/main. Accessed: 2024-09-
13.
[30] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Matteo Paltenghi, Jia Le Tian, Michael Pradel, and Lingming Zhang.
Fuzz4all: Universal fuzzing with large language models, 2024.
[31] Yinlin Deng, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Haoran Peng, Chenyuan Yang, and Lingming Zhang. Large
language models are zero-shot fuzzers: Fuzzing deep-learning libraries via large language
models, 2023.
[32] Hammond Pearce, Baleegh Ahmad, Benjamin Tan, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Ramesh Karri.
Asleep at the keyboard? assessing the security of github copilot’s code contributions, 2021.
[33] Dominik Winterer, Chengyu Zhang, and Zhendong Su. On the unusual effectiveness of type-
aware operator mutations for testing smt solvers. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming
Languages, 4(OOPSLA):1–25, November 2020.
[34] Mohammed Latif Siddiq and Joanna CS Santos. Securityeval dataset: mining vulnerability
examples to evaluate machine learning-based code generation techniques. In Proceedings of
the 1st International Workshop on Mining Software Repositories Applications for Privacy and
Security, pages 29–33, 2022. Licensed under the CC-BY 4.0 License.
[35] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021. Licensed under the
MIT License.
[36] OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o, 2024. Accessed:
2024-09-02.
[37] jwilk. Python-afl. https://github.com/jwilk/python-afl, 2024.
8


A
Appendix / supplemental material
Figure 2: Prompt template used by coding agent for code generation.
Figure 3: Prompt template used by static analyzer agent to detect vulnerabilities.
9


Figure 4: Prompt template used to generate initial inputs for fuzzing
Figure 5: Prompt template used by coding agent to receive feedback from static analyzer.
Figure 6: Prompt template used by coding agent to receive feedback from fuzzing agent
10