Leveraging Prior Experience: An Expandable
Auxiliary Knowledge Base for Text-to-SQL
Zhibo Chu∗
University of Science and Technology of China
Heifei, Anhui, China
zb.chu@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Zichong Wang
Florida International University
Miami, FL, US
ziwang@fiu.edu
Qitao Qin
University of Science and Technology of China
Heifei, Anhui, China
qingqitao@gmail.com
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit impressive problem-solving skills across
many tasks, but they still underperform compared to humans in various downstream
applications, such as text-to-SQL. On the BIRD benchmark leaderboard, human
performance achieves an accuracy of 92.96%, whereas the top-performing method
reaches only 72.39%. Notably, these state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods predomi-
nantly rely on in-context learning to simulate human-like reasoning. However, they
overlook a critical human skill: continual learning. Inspired by the educational
practice of maintaining mistake notebooks during our formative years, we propose
LPE-SQL (Leveraging Prior Experience: An Expandable Auxiliary Knowledge
Base for Text-to-SQL), a novel framework designed to augment LLMs by enabling
continual learning without requiring parameter fine-tuning. LPE-SQL consists
of four modules that i) retrieve relevant entries, ii) efficient sql generation, iii)
generate the final result through a cross-consistency mechanism and iv) log suc-
cessful and failed tasks along with their reasoning processes or reflection-generated
tips. Importantly, the core module of LPE-SQL is the fourth one, while the other
modules employ foundational methods, allowing LPE-SQL to be easily integrated
with SoTA technologies to further enhance performance. Our experimental results
demonstrate that this continual learning approach yields substantial performance
gains, with the smaller Llama-3.1-70B model with surpassing the performance of
the larger Llama-3.1-405B model using SoTA methods.
1
Introduction
Text-to-SQL, the task of converting natural language queries into structured SQL commands, has
garnered significant attention due to its potential to simplify database interactions. Recently, in-
context learning (ICL) with large language models (LLMs) has emerged as the leading approach
for this task [1]. Unlike traditional fine-tuning, ICL supplies instructions and a few demonstration
examples directly in the model’s input prompt, enabling models to generate SQL queries more
effectively and efficiently [2]. Given that LLM performance is highly sensitive to the quality of these
examples, creating optimal examples has become a critical area of research [3].
∗Corresponding author.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2411.13244v1  [cs.CL]  20 Nov 2024


Current efforts to create demonstration examples for text-to-SQL rely on two primary approaches.
The first involves manually annotating a small, fixed set of examples that are reused across queries [4].
While straightforward, this approach often lacks flexibility and struggles with generalization. The
second approach pre-generates a large pool of demonstration examples in advance2, using retrieval
techniques like similarity search to select relevant examples for each query. These examples, typically
derived from training data, pair natural language questions with corresponding SQL queries [5].
The retrieval-based method using training data offers more adaptability and leads to performance
improvements. Furthermore, [2, 6] demonstrate that providing a small number of in-domain examples,
i.e., those from the same database as the test query, in the prompt results in better performance. This
is because in-domain examples contain more relevant details and context, thereby reducing the
model’s generalization burden. To address the challenge of acquiring in-domain data, [7] propose
synthesizing such data by adapting templates from external databases and populating them with
columns and values from the target database, thereby lowering data acquisition costs. However, the
absence of specific domain knowledge, such as the database schema or common query patterns, limits
the model’s ability to generate accurate SQL queries in cross-domain scenarios.
In practical settings, particularly within enterprise environments, multiple distinct business systems,
such as flight booking and concert scheduling systems, often coexist [8], each with vastly different
database structures [8]. This variation complicates SQL query generation and demands greater
adaptability and generalization from LLMs. We conducted extensive experiments comparing LLM
performance on in-domain versus out-of-domain tasks for text-to-SQL, as detailed in Tables 1
and 3. The results indicate that LLMs perform significantly better on in-domain tasks, while their
performance declines substantially when confronted with entirely different database structures. This
underscores the current limitations of LLMs’ generalization abilities in cross-domain scenarios.
Consequently, we argue that for widely-used, high-accuracy tasks like text-to-SQL, effectively
leveraging in-domain data is crucial for reducing the high generalization demands placed on LLMs,
ultimately leading to improved performance and greater societal impact.
While the advantages of using in-domain data are evident, concerns may arise regarding the cost
of acquiring such data for text-to-SQL tasks. Based on practical scenarios and our investigation,
we provide two key reasons to demonstrate the abundance of in-domain data for text-to-SQL in
real-world applications, which has been overlooked in previous work. i) According to the annual
“Top 10 Programming Languages” report [9], SQL continues to dominate the “Jobs list", highlighting
its widespread use across various enterprise roles, including Business Intelligence (BI) analysts,
developers, database administrators (DBAs), product management, operations, compliance, and
business strategy. This inevitably generates a large amount of in-domain data related to enterprise
content and business. ii) Although LLMs excel at natural language tasks, their ability to generate
complex SQL queries remains inferior to that of human experts. Consequently, LLMs are often used
as assistive tools, generating initial SQL queries that users must review and modify. These correct
SQL queries are often crafted by experts and accumulated as problems are solved. This valuable
repository of correct query data, however, remains underutilized, even though it holds significant
potential to enhance LLM performance.
Building on the above analysis and inspired by mistake notebooks, i.e., a learning method commonly
employed by students to track and learn from errors in exams or exercises [10], we propose a similar
strategy for LLMs in the context of text-to-SQL tasks, shown in Fig. 1, referred to as LPE-SQL. In
this approach, after each task, regardless of whether the generated SQL query is correct or erroneous,
the results are logged into either a correct notebook or a mistake notebook. The correct notebook
captures successful queries along with their reasoning paths, while the mistake notebook documents
errors along with a reflection-generated tip designed to prevent the model from repeating similar
mistakes in the future. By referencing these prior experiences, the model not only avoids previous
errors but also reinforces its understanding by leveraging successful reasoning patterns. This iterative
process allows the LLM to optimize its performance over time, improving both the accuracy of
query generation and its ability to learn from accumulated experience. In enterprise settings, this
feedback-driven mechanism holds the potential to significantly narrow the performance gap between
LLMs and human experts in complex SQL generation, while also maximizing the value of existing
data resources.
2For simplicity, we will refer to the large pool of demonstration examples as a “knowledge base” throughout
the following text.
2


Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• Departing from the conventional approach of using training sets as the knowledge base, we
emphasize the value of in-domain data. We propose LPE-SQL, a continual learning method
for text-to-SQL tasks that leverages in-domain data without requiring parameter fine-tuning,
outperforming methods based on out-of-domain and synthetic in-domain data.
• Inspired by human learning strategies, we propose a novel knowledge base structure consist-
ing of a correct notebook and a mistake notebook. By retrieving relevant entries from both
notebooks during future tasks, the model is able to leverage prior experiences, improving
SQL generation accuracy.
• Instead of simply pairing questions with their corresponding SQL queries, these notebooks
are enriched with detailed reasoning paths and reflection-generated tips. Our experiments
demonstrate that such high-information examples can further enhance model performance.
• Empirically, LPE-SQL demonstrates superior performance. Notably, the smaller Llama-3.1-
70B-INT4 model, which utilizes the LPE-SQL method, outperforms the larger Llama-3.1-
405B model, which employs SoTA techniques. The source code and all experimental results
is open-source and available on GitHub3.
Demonstration Selection
prompt1
prompt2
prompt3
result1
result2
result3
result1
result2
result3
Final 
result
SQL Generation
Cross-consistency
Rethink and Update Notebook
Question :xxx 
SQL :xxx
Thought Process :xxx
Based on the following information, please 
provide a Tip on how to avoid making the same 
mistake in the future. 
(1) Question :xxx (2) Error SQL :xxx (3) Compiler 
Hints :xxx  (4) Ground Truth SQL :xxx 
Question :xxx 
Ground Truth SQL :xxx
Error SQL :xxx 
Compiler Hints :xxx  
Tip :xxx 
Please provide your thought process behind the 
generation of this SQL query.
(1) Question :xxx (2) SQL :xxx
result1
result2
result3
Correct?
Yes
No
Correct Notebook
Mistake Notebook
Figure 1: An overview of the proposed method including all four modules
2
Related Work
SoTA Text-to-SQL approaches typically use a multi-module method consisting of demonstration
selection, SQL generation, and a correction module [1]. Below, we discuss each module and relevant
research.
Demonstration Selection. LLMs exhibit superior performance in Text-to-SQL tasks through in-
context learning, where only a few examples are provided within input prompts. However, due
to the high sensitivity of LLMs to prompt design, the success of in-context learning relies heavily
on selecting appropriate examples [3]. This module focuses on identifying the most effective
examples from the knowledge base to mitigate this limitation. Many previous works have utilized
the training set as a knowledge base, employing complex, multi-step retrieval strategies to select
suitable examples [11–14]. In contrast, [2] and [6] found that performance can be significantly
improved by using a small number of in-domain examples directly in the prompt, where question-
SQL pairs correspond to the test database. Furthermore, [7] argues that obtaining in-domain data
3https://github.com/czbnlp/LPE-SQL
3


is often challenging and proposes a hybrid knowledge base that combines synthetic in-domain
data with out-of-domain examples. Nevertheless, both their experimental results and our findings
(reported in Table 1) indicate that synthetic in-domain data is notably less effective than real in-
domain data in enhancing performance. Unlike prior work, our approach utilizes a continuously
expandable knowledge base that incorporates real in-domain data and out-of-domain data. We employ
a straightforward, similarity-based matching retrieval method, which reduces the complexity of the
approach while improving efficiency.
SQL Generation. The SQL generation phase often involves more than simply producing a candidate
query from an input context. Prior works enhance this process by breaking it into multiple subtasks,
solving them incrementally, and then merging the results [4, 12, 15]. Common subtasks include
schema selection, which encompasses both table and column selection. The objective here is to
narrow the schema to include only the necessary tables and columns required for generating the
SQL query. Another critical aspect is identifying query features and classifying them for targeted
handling. For instance, [4] categorizes queries into three classes—easy, non-nested complex, and
nested complex—tailoring prompts accordingly for each type. In our approach, we simplify this stage
by directly instructing the LLM to generate SQL using straightforward prompts. This significantly
reduces the complexity of the method and enhances the efficiency of SQL generation.
Correction. Two widely employed techniques at this stage are self-consistency [16] and self-
debugging [17]. For self-consistency, a notable example is MCS-SQL [18], which introduces a
strategy that generates multiple prompts by varying the selection method and sequence of several
demonstration examples, sampling multiple responses from LLMs to mitigate sensitivity. Their
framework produces three distinct prompts per step, with each prompt executed 20 times by the
LLM. In contrast, our approach executes the LLM only once per prompt, significantly reducing
execution time and API costs, while presenting a greater challenge to our methodology. Regarding
self-debugging, existing approaches typically rely on execution-based feedback [19] or model-based
feedback [12, 20] to correct generated SQL queries. For clarity, we integrate this strategy within the
SQL generation module of our methodology.
3
Methodology
In this section, we introduce LPE-SQL, a continual learning framework for Text-to-SQL that utilizes
real in-domain data without requiring parameter fine-tuning. It leverages human learning strategies,
like mistake notebooks, to create a dynamic knowledge base for enhanced performance. Specifically,
we give a detailed description of our proposed method, as shown in Fig. 1, the LPE-SQL method
consists of four components: i) Demonstration Selection: demonstrations are selected based on
question similarity from correct and mistake notebooks, with varying proportions prepended to the
prompt for in-context learning. ii) SQL Generatation: these demonstrations, combined with the
database schema and task-specific instructions as prompt, are used by the LLM to generate SQL
queries. iii) Cross-consistency: multiple SQL results are compared to ensure consistency across
different prompts, selecting the most stable result for increased robustness. iv) Rethink and Update
Notebook: the generated SQL is evaluated against the ground truth; if correct, the model logs its
thought process in the correct notebook. If incorrect, the model reflects on the failure and generates
improvement tips for the mistake notebook, promoting continuous learning and refinement. We will
discuss each component in detail.
3.1
Demonstration Selection
Given a few demonstration examples, LLMs can leverage them to generate SQL queries with a more
standardized format and improved accuracy [5]. Demonstration examples selection plays a crucial
role in few-shot learning, significantly impacting the performance of LLMs [21].
We adopt a hybrid strategy for demonstration selection, wherein we choose a total of k demonstration
examples from the knowledge base based on their embedding similarity to the test sample. The
correct rate denotes the proportion of examples drawn from the correct notebook among the k total
examples. Specifically, we construct prompts by selecting examples from both the correct and mistake
notebooks at three distinct ratios: correct rate = 1, where all k examples originate from the correct
notebook; correct rate = 0.5, featuring an equal distribution of examples from both notebooks; and
correct rate = 0, where all examples are sourced from the mistake notebook. These examples, along
4


with the database and the user’s query, are integrated to form the final prompt. By varying the correct
rate, we aim to thoroughly investigate and leverage the unique contributions of both the correct and
mistake notebooks. The experimental analysis is reported in Section 5.
3.2
SQL generatation
After the Demonstration Selection module, we utilize three distinct prompts. For each prompt, we
employ a straightforward approach that enables the LLMs to directly generate a single SQL query.
Following prevous work [19], if an error message occurs during SQL execution, we use the error
message as feedback. We take the database, user question, initial SQL, and error message as input,
and ask LLMs to output the corrected SQL. This correction process is not illustrated in the SQL
Generation module in Fig. 1.
3.3
Cross-consistency
Traditional self-consistency approaches in text-to-SQL tasks typically increase the randomness of
LLM outputs by setting higher temperatures, thereby generating diverse SQL queries. These diverse
queries are then aggregated through majority voting to determine the most consistent result [18].
However, this method has notable drawbacks: higher temperatures can exacerbate model hallucina-
tions [22], and the necessity for multiple API calls leads to increased costs in terms of token usage
and runtime.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel cross-consistency method that utilizes diverse
prompts generated during the Demonstration Selection and SQL Generation stages. After selecting
demonstrations with varying correct rates (as described in Section 3.1), we construct distinct prompts.
Each prompt instructs the LLM to generate a SQL query at a lower temperature, ensuring high quality
and stability while reducing hallucinations. Importantly, only one API call is made per prompt,
minimizing costs in terms of token usage and runtime. The resulting SQL queries are executed
against the database, and their results are compared for consistency.
3.4
Rethink and Update Notebook
The Rethink and Update Notebook module serves as a pivotal component of our LPE-SQL method-
ology, facilitating continuous learning through systematic evaluation and knowledge accumulation.
This module comprises two essential processes: Rethink and Update Notebook.
Rethink: In the Rethink phase, the system evaluates the SQL queries produced by the SQL Gen-
eration module, comparing their execution results against those of the ground truth SQL to ensure
alignment and accuracy. This evaluation mirrors the educational practice of maintaining a mistake
notebook to enhance learning outcomes. Specifically, when execution results mismatch, the model
performs reflective analysis to identify discrepancies and provide targeted improvement suggestions.
Conversely, when match of both execution results, the model constructs a detailed reasoning pro-
cess inspired by the “chain-of-thought” methodology [23]. We expect this reasoning process to
contribute to multi-step reasoning necessary for more complex tasks, thereby reducing the occurrence
of hallucinations.
Update Notebook: The Update Notebook process operationalizes the insights gained from the
Rethink phase by systematically integrating them into the relevant notebooks. This step involves
updating the mistake notebook with reflective feedback and enhancing the correct notebook with
validated reasoning chains, ensuring that accumulated knowledge is readily accessible for future
tasks. By maintaining an up-to-date knowledge base of both successful and erroneous instances, the
system leverages historical data to inform and improve future SQL query generation, fostering an
environment of continual improvement and robustness.
4
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Datasets and Evaluation Metrics. We conduct our experiments on the BIRD dataset [24], which
is recognized as one of the most challenging benchmarks for Text-to-SQL tasks. BIRD consists
of 12,751 unique question-SQL pairs derived from 95 comprehensive databases across 37 diverse
domains, including education, healthcare, and more. Specifically designed to replicate real-world
5


database scenarios, BIRD incorporates external knowledge and provides detailed descriptions of both
databases and columns to address potential ambiguities in query generation. If not explicitly stated,
all evaluations of LPE-SQL were conducted on the full development set.
To assess model performance, we utilize execution accuracy (EX), a metric that compares the
execution results of the predicted SQL queries with those of the reference queries on the corresponding
database instances. This approach measures the functional correctness of queries, accommodating
variations in valid SQL formulations that yield the same results.
Large Language Models. We evaluate our approach using several leading LLMs, including Llama3.1-
70B [25], CodeLlama-34B [26]4, and GPT-3.5-turbo-0125 (GPT-3.5). Llama3.1 represents one of
the most widely-used general-purpose open-source LLMs, while CodeLlama is a specialized variant
of Llama2 [27], further trained on code-specific datasets. GPT-3.5, a closed-source model, is among
the most prominent LLMs in the field. Together, these models cover a broad spectrum of application
scenarios. GPT-3.5 is accessed via OpenAI APIs, while the Llama3.1-70B and CodeLlama-34B
model is downloaded from hugging face to perform experiments locally.
Due to the high computational restrictions and API cost of the most advanced models, such as
Llama3.1-405B and GPT-4o, we were unable to include them in our experiments. However, it is
noteworthy that the SoTA method by [1], which utilized Llama3.1-405B, achieved an EX score of
59.18 on a subset of the BIRD development set. In contrast, our approach, using the significantly
smaller Llama3.1-70B model with INT4 quantization, achieved a notably higher score of 61.22 on
the same evaluation set. This substantial performance improvement highlights the effectiveness of
our method, with further analysis provided in the Section 5.
Implementation Details. For the initialization of the knowledge base, unless explicitly stated, we
randomly selected 1,000 question-SQL pairs from the training set, leveraging our method to populate
both the correct and mistake notebooks. For subsequent accumulation strategies of the knowledge
base, we have two approaches: dynamically accumulating examples during the evaluation process
following the LPE-SQL method, and not accumulating at all. Additionally, we drew inspiration from
the work of [4] to create four manually annotated demonstration examples. Using the FAISS [28]
library, we leveraged the similarities between the sentence embeddings5 of the target and candidate
questions to identify the most similar entries from both the correct and mistake notebooks, with the
quantity determined by specific experimental settings. To minimize the randomness of the LLM
outputs, we set the temperature to 0. All prompt templates are detailed in Appendix.
5
Results
For thorough evaluation, the following research questions are addressed:
RQ1: How important is real in-domain data? We conducted a thorough analysis comparing real
in-domain data with both out-domain data and synthetic in-domain data as knowledge base.
• Real in-domain data vs. out-domain data: We conducted experiments with Llama3.1-70B,
CodeLlama-34B, and GPT-3.5 under two different knowledge base configurations: i) using
randomly selected 1,000 question-SQL pairs from the training set, leveraging the notebooks
generated by LPE-SQL to populate the knowledge base initialization method, without
dynamically accumulating examples during the evaluation process, and ii) initializing
the knowledge base as empty and only dynamically accumulating examples during the
evaluation process. The results reported through the cross-consistency method, as shown in
Table 1, demonstrate that the use of accumulated in-domain data outperforms the exclusive
use of out-domain data by an average of 4.96% across these LLMs on the full BIRD
development set. This improvement is primarily attributed to the alignment between the
notebooks accumulated from in-domain data and the evaluation examples, which provides
richer contextual information that aids the model in generating accurate responses. This
indicates that real in-domain data is more effective than out-domain data in these scenarios.
4Due to the high GPU requirements of running Llama3.1-70B and CodeLlama-34B, we utilized the INT4
quantized and AWQ quantized versions, respectively, available on Hugging Face.
5The encoder model utilized is all-MiniLM-L6-v2, available on Hugging Face at https://huggingface.
co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2.
6


• Real in-domain data vs. synthetic in-domain data: To the best of our knowledge, the only
work that has explored synthetic in-domain data for text-to-SQL tasks is [7]. However, since
the code for their data generation was not open-sourced, we could not replicate their exact
results. Nevertheless, their experimental findings (Tables 1 and 2 in their paper) indicate
that using only synthetic in-domain data leads to worse performance compared to solely
using out-domain data across various LLMs and datasets. Combined with our findings from
Table 1, it is clear that synthetic in-domain data fails to adequately represent real in-domain
data.
Table 1: Performance comparison of out-of-domain and in-domain examples across different LLMs.
Init method: Indicates the initialization method for the knowledge base, where “T” denotes the
selection of 1,000 question-SQL pairs from the training set, with the notebook generated by LPE-SQL
serving as the initial knowledge base. “-” indicates that the knowledge base is initialized as empty.
Continuous accumulation: ✓signifies that examples are continuously accumulated into the notebook
during evaluation, while × indicates the opposite.
Init method
Continuous accumulation
Model
Llama 3.1-70B
CodeLlama-34B
GPT-3.5
T
×
59.45
48.76
55.48
-
✓
63.89 (+4.44)
54.24 (+5.48)
60.43 (+4.95)
RQ2: What is the impact of the correct notebook and mistake notebook on handling SQL
generation with varying difficulty? We conducted experiments in scenarios more aligned with the
real world, specifically by initializing the knowledge base with a large amount of out-domain data
and continuously adding new in-domain data. We selected demonstration examples from the correct
and mistake notebooks, using three different selection ratios (detailed in Section 3.1), and analyzed
SQL generation performance. Results are shown in Table 2.
Specifically, in Table 2, Llama-3.1 and CodeLlama consistently outperform the mistake notebook
alone across most difficulty levels when using the correct notebook, particularly showing an average
improvement of 4.49% on challenging tasks. This demonstrates that these models excel at learning
the thought processes from the correct notebook to execute complex reasoning more effectively.
In contrast, GPT-3.5 performs better using only the mistake notebook, indicating its strength in
leveraging error experiences for reasoning tasks.
When both notebooks are used together, Llama-3.1 and CodeLlama show notable improvements in
handling challenging tasks, benefiting from the integration of correct thought processes and error
feedback, which helps reduce hallucinations and avoid repeated mistakes. Conversely, GPT-3.5 shows
significant improvement in simple tasks, but its performance declines in moderate and challenging
tasks compared to when it relies solely on the mistake notebook. This suggests that GPT-3.5 tends to
learn from past errors more than from correct reasoning paths, particularly in more complex tasks,
indicating a nuanced distinction in its learning process.
Through the analysis presented, we find that Llama-3.1 and CodeLlama achieve more consistent
results, compared to GPT-3.5, which often exhibits an opposing trend. This discrepancy may arise
from the more similar structure and training data of Llama-3.1 and CodeLlama, as opposed to GPT-
3.5’s differing characteristics. Consequently, these models demonstrate distinct learning patterns.
Exploring these distinct learning patterns could be a valuable direction for future research.
RQ3: What is the role of cross-consistency, and is it necessary? From Table 2, it is evident that
using both the correct and mistake notebooks in total yields superior results for Llama3.1-70B and
GPT-3.5 compared to employing only the correct or mistake notebooks. However, CodeLlama-34B
achieves its best performance solely with the correct notebook. Additionally, at more granular levels
of difficulty, the differences among the models vary significantly depending on the correct rate. This
suggests that the impact of the correct and mistake notebooks differs across various LLMs, likely due
to variations in architecture, training data, or parameter settings, leading to distinct preferences in
information processing. Consequently, without a clear understanding of the specific effects of the
correct and mistake notebooks on a given LLM, achieving stable performance becomes challenging.
7


To address this inconsistency, we employed cross-consistency, and the results in Table 2 demonstrate
that cross-consistency achieved either optimal results or results deviating by less than 1% from
the best. However, it is important to note that implementing cross-consistency incurs additional
time and API token costs. Exploring the applicability of the correct and mistake notebooks across
different LLMs to fully leverage optimal combinations at various difficulty levels presents a promising
avenue for future research aimed at enhancing performance while minimizing runtime and API token
expenditures.
Table 2: EX scores on the full BIRD development set at different difficulty levels. Method: “CR-1”,
“CR-0.5”, and “CR-0” correspond to correct rate = 1, correct rate = 0.5, and correct rate = 0,
respectively, indicating the proportion of examples from the correct notebook. “Vote” refers to the
results generated using cross-consistency. The highest and second scores for each model in each
section are highlighted in red and blue, respectively.
Model
Method
Difficulty level
Total
Simple
Moderate
Challenging
Llama-3.1-70B
CR-1
70.92
56.47
47.59
64.34
CR-0.5
71.24
58.84
53.79
65.84
CR-0
69.62
57.54
44.83
63.62
Vote
72.11
59.70
51.03
66.36
CodeLlama-34B
CR-1
63.03
46.77
39.31
55.87
CR-0.5
62.16
45.26
42.07
55.15
CR-0
60.86
42.67
33.10
52.74
Vote
62.81
45.26
37.93
55.15
GPT-3.5
CR-1
65.73
49.57
46.21
59.00
CR-0.5
69.41
50.86
46.21
61.60
CR-0
66.16
52.59
47.59
60.30
Vote
68.22
51.94
44.83
61.08
RQ4: How does performance improve as the number of entries accumulated in the notebook
increases? To answer RQ4 and comprehensively demonstrate the performance of LPE-SQL, we
compared it with the current SoTA method in the BIRD benchmark [1]. For compare, we used the
same evaluation set as theirs, which consisted of 10% of the entries from each database in the BIRD
dev set. We conducted comparisons on Llama-3.1-70B using three different notebook configuration
strategies, where all strategies initialized the notebook with 1,000 examples collected from the training
set. The differences between the strategies are as follows: i) no further examples are accumulated
during evaluation, ii) examples are continuously accumulated into the notebook during evaluation,
and iii) to show performance improvement as the notebook grows, we accumulated the remaining
examples from the BIRD dev set into the notebook, while continuously accumulating examples during
evaluation. The results are shown in Table 3. Experimental results demonstrate that as the number of
in-domain data entries accumulated in the notebook increases, Llama-3.1-70B demonstrates steady
improvements in EX scores across various difficulty levels, with particularly notable gains at the
challenging level, where performance doubles when utilizing a notebook rich in in-domain data. This
strongly highlights the value of continual learning. Furthermore, we compared our approach with the
SoTA method proposed by [1], which employs a comprehensive and iterative strategy. This method
includes generating a candidate SQL query, then applying corrections through iterative re-generation
based on database execution errors [29], revisions guided by database administrator instructions [12],
and model-based feedback akin to Reflexion [30]. It also incorporates self-consistency [16] to
generate multiple responses and selects the most consistent result throughout the entire pipeline for
augmentation, SQL generation, and SQL correction. In contrast, our approach, while only utilizing
fundamental methods in each module, leverages continual learning and surpasses the SoTA method
by 2.04%.
RQ5: How do high-information examples enhance model performance? We conducted two
sets of experiments using the same experimental setup as in RQ2 on the Llama-3.1-70B model. In
one setup, the examples in the notebook adhered to our proposed high-information methodology,
which included additional insights such as the thought process and relevant tips. In the other setup,
the notebook contained only simple question-ground truth SQL pairs without any supplementary
8


Table 3: The impact of increasing the scale of notebooks on the EX scores of the BIRD development
subset across different difficulty levels.Efull indicates that we accumulated the remaining examples
from the BIRD development set into the notebook.
Model
Init method
Continuous accumulation
Difficulty level
Total
Simple
Moderate
Challenging
Llama-3.1-70B
T + Efull
✓
67.90
53.70
50.00
61.22
T
✓
61.73 (-6.17)
48.15 (-5.55)
41.67 (-8.33)
55.10 (-6.12)
T
×
60.49 (-7.41)
42.59 (-11.11)
25.00 (-25.00)
51.02 (-10.20)
Llama-3.1-405B
SoTA[1]
-
-
-
59.18 (-2.04)
information. This setup aimed to highlight the impact of high-information examples on model
performance.
As shown in Table 4, models with high-information examples consistently outperformed those trained
with low-information examples across tasks of varying difficulty levels. Notably, the most significant
improvement was observed in challenging tasks, where accuracy increased by 4.82%. Overall,
the average accuracy across all difficulty levels reflected an improvement of 1.69% when utilizing
high-information examples. These results underscore that providing the model with richer context and
reasoning information significantly enhances its capability to handle more complex SQL generation
tasks, particularly in challenging scenarios that require deeper reasoning and error correction.
Table 4: Performance comparison of Llama3.1-70B using low-information and high-information
examples on the complete BIRD development set.
Method
Difficulty level
Total
Simple
Moderate
Challenging
Low-information
70.92
57.97
46.21
64.67
High-information
72.11 (+1.19)
59.70 (+1.73)
51.03 (+4.82)
66.36 (+1.69)
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we present LPE-SQL, a novel continual learning framework for Text-to-SQL tasks
that utilizes real in-domain data without the need for parameter fine-tuning. Our approach draws
inspiration from human learning strategies to create a dynamic knowledge base composed of a correct
notebook and a mistake notebook. Extensive experiments conducted on the challenging BIRD dataset
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, as the smaller Llama-3.1-70B model outperforms the
larger Llama-3.1-405B model using SoTA methodtechniques. Furthermore, we note that different
large language models display varying learning patterns with the correct and mistake notebooks.
Leveraging these distinct patterns could further enhance performance, presenting a valuable area for
exploration.
7
Limitations
This work has several limitations and areas for improvement. Since advancing the SoTA was not our
primary goal and due to the high cost of APIs for advanced models like GPT-4o, we did not evaluate
our approach with the most powerful LLMs. Additionally, we did not incorporate schema linking, a
common technique for recognizing tables and columns, nor did we use methods like high-temperature
self-consistency to generate multiple candidate SQL queries from a single prompt. As a result, the
full potential of our approach remain unexplored. We believe that our continuous learning framework
for integrating in-domain data into the correct and mistake notebooks is applicable not only to
Text-to-SQL tasks but also to other reasoning tasks, such as mathematical reasoning, which we will
continue to explore.
9


References
[1] Karime Maamari, Fadhil Abubaker, Daniel Jaroslawicz, and Amine Mhedhbi. The death of
schema linking? text-to-sql in the age of well-reasoned language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.07702, 2024.
[2] Nitarshan Rajkumar, Raymond Li, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. Evaluating the text-to-sql capabilities
of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00498, 2022.
[3] Federico Errica, Giuseppe Siracusano, Davide Sanvito, and Roberto Bifulco. What did i do
wrong? quantifying llms’ sensitivity and consistency to prompt engineering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.12334, 2024.
[4] Mohammadreza Pourreza and Davood Rafiei. Din-sql: Decomposed in-context learning of
text-to-sql with self-correction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[5] Gabriel Poesia, Oleksandr Polozov, Vu Le, Ashish Tiwari, Gustavo Soares, Christopher Meek,
and Sumit Gulwani. Synchromesh: Reliable code generation from pre-trained language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11227, 2022.
[6] Shuaichen Chang and Eric Fosler-Lussier. How to prompt llms for text-to-sql: A study in
zero-shot, single-domain, and cross-domain settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11853, 2023.
[7] Shuaichen Chang and Eric Fosler-Lussier. Selective demonstrations for cross-domain text-to-sql.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06302, 2023.
[8] Hervé Panetto and Joe Cecil. Information systems for enterprise integration, interoperability
and networking: theory and applications, 2013.
[9] IEEE Spectrum. The top programming languages, 2023.
[10] Zeyi Yu, Gang Cen, Linhao Zhao, and Chenjie Zhu. Design of smart mistake notebook based
on ai and big data. In International Conference on Computer Science and Education, pages
18–28. Springer, 2022.
[11] Hanchong Zhang, Ruisheng Cao, Lu Chen, Hongshen Xu, and Kai Yu.
Act-sql: In-
context learning for text-to-sql with automatically-generated chain-of-thought. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.17342, 2023.
[12] Shayan Talaei, Mohammadreza Pourreza, Yu-Chen Chang, Azalia Mirhoseini, and Amin Saberi.
Chess: Contextual harnessing for efficient sql synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16755,
2024.
[13] Wenbo Xu, Liang Yan, Peiyi Han, Haifeng Zhu, Chuanyi Liu, Shaoming Duan, Cuiyun Gao,
and Yingwei Liang. Tcsr-sql: Towards table content-aware text-to-sql with self-retrieval. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.01183, 2024.
[14] Zhenhe Wu, Zhongqiu Li, Jie Zhang, Mengxiang Li, Yu Zhao, Ruiyu Fang, Zhongjiang He,
Xuelong Li, Zhoujun Li, and Shuangyong Song. Rb-sql: A retrieval-based llm framework for
text-to-sql. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08273, 2024.
[15] Karime Maamari and Amine Mhedhbi. End-to-end text-to-sql generation within an analytics
insight engine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12104, 2024.
[16] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
[17] Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language
models to self-debug. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023.
[18] Dongjun Lee, Choongwon Park, Jaehyuk Kim, and Heesoo Park.
Mcs-sql: Leveraging
multiple prompts and multiple-choice selection for text-to-sql generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.07467, 2024.
10


[19] Judith Jeyafreeda Andrew, Marc Vincent, Anita Burgun, and Nicolas Garcelon. Evaluating
llms for temporal entity extraction from pediatric clinical text in rare diseases context. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Patient-Oriented Language Processing (CL4Health)@
LREC-COLING 2024, pages 145–152, 2024.
[20] Arian Askari, Christian Poelitz, and Xinye Tang. Magic: Generating self-correction guideline
for in-context text-to-sql. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12692, 2024.
[21] Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen.
What makes good in-context examples for gpt-3? arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06804, 2021.
[22] Matthew Renze and Erhan Guven. The effect of sampling temperature on problem solving in
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05201, 2024.
[23] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le,
Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
[24] Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin,
Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, et al. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for
large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
36, 2024.
[25] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle,
Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd
of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
[26] Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan,
Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, et al. Code llama: Open foundation
models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
[27] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open
foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[28] Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-
Emmanuel Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. The faiss library. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.08281, 2024.
[29] Chenglong Wang, Kedar Tatwawadi, Marc Brockschmidt, Po-Sen Huang, Yi Mao, Oleksandr
Polozov, and Rishabh Singh. Robust text-to-sql generation with execution-guided decoding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03100, 2018.
[30] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
11


A
prompt templates
This section introduces the prompt templates used in LPE-SQL, categorized into four types: the
template for generically generating SQL queries (List 1), the template for generating the corresponding
thought process based on the SQL query (List 2), the template for generating tips based on the
incorrect SQL and the ground truth SQL (List 3), and the template for re-generating the SQL using
error information from SQL execution (List 4). For demonstration purposes, we use a scenario that
combines both the correct and mistake notebooks (correct rate = 0.5).
# For your
reference , here are some
examples of Questions , sql queries
,
and
thought
processes
related to the
Question you ’re working
with
{Example2}
# Below are
examples of mistakes you ’ve made
before
that are
similar
to
the
question you ’re about to tackle , so please
refer to not making
the same
mistake!
{Example1}
{Example2}
# Schema of the
database:
{Database
Schema}
-- Using
valid
SQLite and
understanding Hint , answer the
following
questions
for the tables
provided
above.
-- {Question}
-- {External
Knowledge}
Generate
the SQLite for the above
question
after
thinking
step by step
:
In your response , you do not need to mention
your
intermediate
steps.
Do not
include
any
comments in your
response.
Do not need to start
with the symbol
‘‘‘
Your SQL code
should be concise
and
efficient.
You only need to return the result
SQLite SQL code
start
from
SELECT
Listing 1: The template for generically generating SQL queries.
# Schema of the
database:
{ database_schema }
# Question:
{Question}
# External
Knowledge :
{External
Knowledge}
# You just
generated
the
following
SQL:
{SQL Query}
Now , please
provide
your
thought
process
behind the
generation of this
SQL query. Your
explanation
should be concise
and efficient , focusing
on the key
reasoning
steps.
Listing 2: The template for re-generating an SQL query based on error feedback from SQL execution.
# Schema of the
database:
{Database
Schema}
# Question:
{Question}
12


# External
Knowledge :
{External
Knowledge}
# Error SQL Query:
{Error SQL Query}
# Error
information:
{Error}
# SQL after
Reflection:
{SQL after
Reflection}
# Ground
Truth SQL:
{Ground
Truth SQL}
Error SQL Query is the result you
generate
the first
time and SQL
after
Reflection is the result you
generate
again
based on the Error
information
returned by the
compiler
knowing
that the first
generated
result was wrong. Now that both
results
are known to be wrong , I am
providing
Ground
Truth SQL for your
reference , please
think
carefully
about why your
first two
results
were not correct , please
provide a
Tip on how to avoid
making the same
mistake in the future. Note that
you only need to return the Tip. Please
return in the
following
format
:
# Tip:
Listing 3: The template for generating tips based on the incorrect SQL and the ground truth SQL.
# For your
reference , here are some
examples of Questions , sql queries
,
and
thought
processes
related to the
Question you ’re working
with
{Example2}
# Below are
examples of mistakes you ’ve made
before
that are
similar
to
the
question you ’re about to tackle , so please
refer to not making
the same
mistake!
{Example1}
{Example2}
# Schema of the
database:
{Database
Schema}
# Question:
{Question}
# External
Knowledge :
{External
Knowledge}
# SQL Query:
{SQL Query}
# Error:
{Error}
Reflect on the error
encountered in the SQL query and
provide a
corrected
SQL query.
In your response , you do not need to mention
your
intermediate
steps.
Do not
include
any
comments in your
response.
Do not need to start
with the symbol
‘‘‘
Your SQL code
should be concise
and
efficient.
You only need to return the result
SQLite SQL code
13


start
from
SELECT
Listing 4: The template for generating a thought process corresponding to the SQL query.
B
Reasoning Pipeline
To clarify the proposed LPE-SQL method, we provide a summary of the reasoning pipeline
in Algorithm Tables 1 and 2.
Algorithm Table 1 outlines the reasoning process for a single
correct rate setting, whereas Algorithm Table 2 demonstrates the reasoning process using the
cross-consistency method across various correct rate settings. The complete source code is available
in src/gpt_request.py.
Algorithm 1 Main Pipeline of Single Reasoning for LPE-SQL
Input: Initialization of the knowledge base KG, correct rate CR, number of demonstration examples
k, Question Q, External Knowledge EK, database path db_path, ground truth SQL GT.
Output: SQL query.
1: Initialize a retriever (CR, KG) to retrieve and update data in KG.
2: Demonstration example E ←retriever.get_example(Q)
3: Prompt ←generate_prompt_common_sql(Q, E, EK)
4: SQL query ←LLM(Prompt)
5: Prompt ←generate_prompt_thought_process(Q, EK, SQL query)
6: Thought process ←LLM(Prompt)
7: _, error ←execute_sql(SQL query, db_path)
8: if error ̸= None then
9:
Prompt ←generate_prompt_reflection_sql(E, Q, EK, SQL query, error)
10:
Reflectioned SQL query ←LLM(Prompt)
11: end if
12: Predicted SQL ←if New SQL query ̸= None then New SQL query else SQL query
13: res ←execute_compare(Predicted SQL, GT)
14: if res == 0 then
15:
Prompt ←generate_prompt_reflection_tip(Q, EK, SQL query, error, Reflectioned SQL
query, GT)
16:
Tip ←LLM(Prompt)
17:
KG ←retriever.add_to_mistake_notebook(Q, EK, SQL query, error, Reflectioned SQL
query, GT, Tip)
18: else
19:
KG ←retriever.add_to_correct_notebook(Q, EK, Predicted SQL, Thought process)
20: end if
21: Obtain the predicted SQL query and updated knowledge base KG.
Algorithm 2 Main Pipeline of Cross-Consistency Reasoning for LPE-SQL
Input: Initialization of all knowledge bases KG_list, list of all correct rates CR_list, number of
demonstration examples k, Question Q, External Knowledge EK, database path db_path, ground
truth SQL GT.
Output: Final SQL query.
1: Initialize a list sql_list to store all generated SQL queries.
2: for each CR, KG in CR_list and KG_list do
3:
Use Algorithm 1 to obtain the SQL query based on the current CR and KG, and save it into
sql_list.
4: end for
5: Compare the execution results of all SQL queries in sql_list, and select the SQL query with the
most consistent results as the final SQL query.
6: Obtain the final SQL query and all updated knowledge base.
C
MORE RESULTS
In Fig. 2, we present a comparison of different methods applied to problems of varying difficulty
levels from the BIRD development dataset. These methods include: i) using only manually annotated
examples based on [4], ii) using 1000 examples collected from the training set, and iii) using examples
14


Figure 2: EX scores across problems of varying difficulty levels from the BIRD development dataset
using different methods.
dynamically accumulated during evaluation via the LPE-SQL method. The first two methods are
commonly used in few-shot learning as knowledge base, while the third method is introduced in our
LPE-SQL approach. Consequently, a detailed examination of our approach, along with a comparison
to other methods, by analyzing performance across problems of varying difficulty at a more granular
level, provides valuable insights.
Using the training set as a knowledge base does not significantly outperform carefully designed
fixed examples. Across all three different LLMs tested in the experiment, using the training set as a
knowledge base provided a slight performance improvement—around 1%—over manually annotated
examples for tasks of simple and moderate difficulty. However, at the challenging difficulty level, both
Llama-3.1-70B and CodeLlama-34B showed consistent performance drops, with CodeLlama-34B
experiencing a decline of 3.44%. These observations indicate that there is no significant difference in
performance between these two methods.
In-domain data accumulation leads to comprehensive improvements. Compared to both using
the training set as a knowledge base and relying on carefully designed fixed examples, continuously
accumulating domain-specific data during evaluation results in significant improvements across
various difficulty levels. At the simple, moderate, and challenging levels, applying the evaluation-
only method with different LLMs achieves at least 4.44%, 1.94%, and 2.76% improvements over the
other two methods, respectively. The maximum observed improvements reach 6.92%, 7.76%, and
11.72%, underscoring the effectiveness of this approach.
15