1
A Survey on Code Generation with LLM-based Agents
Yihong Dong*, Xue Jiang*, Jiaru Qian*, Tian Wang, Kechi Zhang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li
Abstract—Code generation agents powered by large language models (LLMs) are revolutionizing the software development paradigm.
Distinct from previous code generation techniques, code generation agents are characterized by three core features. 1) Autonomy:
the ability to independently manage the entire workflow, from task decomposition to coding and debugging. 2) Expanded task scope:
capabilities that extend beyond generating code snippets to encompass the full software development lifecycle (SDLC). 3) Enhancement
of engineering practicality: a shift in research emphasis from algorithmic innovation toward practical engineering challenges, such
as system reliability, process management, and tool integration. This domain has recently witnessed rapid development and an
explosion in research, demonstrating significant application potential. This paper presents a systematic survey of the field of LLM-
based code generation agents. We trace the technology’s developmental trajectory from its inception and systematically categorize its
core techniques, including both single-agent and multi-agent architectures. Furthermore, this survey details the applications of LLM-
based agents across the full SDLC, summarizes mainstream evaluation benchmarks and metrics, and catalogs representative tools.
Finally, by analyzing the primary challenges, we identify and propose several foundational, long-term research directions for the future
work of the field.
Index Terms—Code Generation; Software Development; Large Language Models; LLM-based Agent; Multi-agent System
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
Code generation aims to automatically transform human
intentions expressed in certain specifications into executable
computer programs, serving as a fundamental approach
to improving software productivity. Early research in code
generation primarily adopted program synthesis meth-
ods [1], deriving verifiably correct programs through formal
specifications. However, due to the difficulty of writing
specifications, this approach was long confined to well-
defined specific tasks. To enhance generalization capa-
bilities, research subsequently shifted toward data-driven
paradigms based on deep learning, treating code gener-
ation as a probabilistic sequence learning problem [2, 3].
Nevertheless, code snippets generated by such methods
often had limited functionality and frequently contained
syntactic or semantic errors, leading to compilation or ex-
ecution failures. Consequently, automated program writing
has long been considered an extremely challenging task.
This situation fundamentally changed with the emergence
of Large Language Models (LLMs) [4–6]. Although LLM
technology originated from natural language processing, it
has also demonstrated remarkable potential in code gen-
eration tasks. This is primarily attributed to the massive
code contributions from open-source communities repre-
sented by GitHub in the vast pre-training corpora, enabling
models to master the syntax and semantics of program-
ming languages as well as programming algorithms and
paradigms. Benefiting from this, the field of code generation
has ushered in unprecedented development opportunities
and rapidly become one of the most promising application
directions for LLM technology.
•
Version: v2 (September 30, 2025).
•
GitHub link: https://github.com/JiaruQian/awesome-llm-based-agent4code
•
* The authors contribute equally to this work.
•
The authors are mainly with the School of Computer Science, Peking
University, Beijing, China;
Contact e-mail: dongyh, jiangxue@stu.pku.edu.cn;
Although LLM-based code generation techniques have
shown excellent performance in generating standalone pro-
grams [7–9], their single-response mode exposes significant
limitations when handling complex, engineering-oriented
software development tasks. Native LLMs lack the ability
to autonomously decompose tasks, interact with real devel-
opment environments, validate generated code, and imple-
ment continuous self-correction mechanisms. As a result,
they struggle to independently complete software devel-
opment tasks that require cross-file context understanding,
dynamic debugging, and iterative optimization. To address
these problems, LLM-based code generation agents have
been proposed, which use LLMs as the brain to construct
code agents capable of autonomous planning, action, obser-
vation, and iterative optimization [10–12]. They are capable
of simulating the complete workflow of human program-
mers, including analyzing requirements, writing code, run-
ning tests, diagnosing errors, and applying fixes [13, 14].
This comprehensive capability enables them to handle com-
plex programming tasks that exceed the limitations of in-
dividual LLMs, thereby producing higher-quality and more
reliable software outputs. Such advancements represent a
critical step toward achieving higher levels of automation in
software development. This pursuit is closely aligned with
the historical evolution of software engineering. Over time,
development paradigms have shifted from individual pro-
gramming to team-based collaborative development. This
transition has been driven by the growing complexity of
software systems and the corresponding need for a clear
division of labor.
LLM-based code generation has been extensively dis-
cussed and surveyed, while systematic research on code
generation agents remains insufficient. To stimulate explo-
ration in this field, we emphasize three core distinctions be-
tween code generation agents and previous code generation
techniques. First is autonomy. Traditional code generation
models assist human developers through code completion
arXiv:2508.00083v2  [cs.SE]  30 Sep 2025


2
or function generation in a passive manner. In contrast, code
generation agents can actively manage and execute develop-
ment workflows from requirements to implementation [15–
17]. This paradigm transforms the role of the developer
from code writer to task definer, process supervisor, and
final result reviewer. The second distinction is the expansion
of code generation task scope. Previous code generation
research typically involved tasks with clear boundaries and
well-defined specifications, such as completing code lines
based on context and generating function bodies based on
function signatures [18]. Code generation agents, however,
can cover most tasks in software development, includ-
ing handling ambiguous requirements [19], implementing
entire project coding [15–17], testing and refactoring pro-
grams [20–22], and iterative optimization based on real-
time feedback [11]. Finally, there is a shift in research focus
from algorithmic innovation to engineering practice. Early
code generation research focused primarily on improving
algorithmic accuracy, such as enhancing model architectures
or optimizing training methods to pursue higher code syn-
tactic correctness and semantic matching [3, 23–25]. The
research focus of code generation agents has significantly
shifted toward engineering implementation, including how
to ensure agent reliability [12, 26], how to manage com-
plex workflows [17, 27], and how to enable agents to
efficiently invoke external tools [28, 29]. These problems
have expanded from pure model generation capabilities to
system design, process management, and human-computer
collaboration, entering territories closer to classical software
engineering.
Today, LLM-based code generation agents are pro-
foundly impacting software development. Tools represented
by Claude Code and Cursor can already preliminarily com-
plete end-to-end software development through multi-agent
collaborative division of labor, typically with lower time
and cost than human teams. Vibe Coding has become a
popular programming practice, where developers use nat-
ural language prompts to describe problems and provide
them to specialized LLMs for software development, which
then generate software [30]. However, some important prob-
lems remain unresolved. First, integrating code generation
agents with real development environments faces numer-
ous difficulties. Actual software projects often contain large
and private codebases, customized build processes, internal
API calling specifications, and unwritten team conventions.
How to enable agents to efficiently understand and utilize
this non-public, highly contextualized information is a criti-
cal challenge that must be solved for their transition from
general demonstrations to professional tools. Then, code
generated by agents often contains logical defects, perfor-
mance pitfalls, or security vulnerabilities that are difficult to
cover with unit tests [31–36], forcing developers to invest
unexpected effort in code review and manual repairs.
Facing opportunities and challenges, we need more at-
tention to the research and development of code generation
agents. To this end, this survey comprehensively reviews
relevant literature, introduces concepts and knowledge of
LLM-based code generation agents, and systematically re-
views the latest advances in code generation agents, mainly
covering key technologies, evaluation methods, deployed
tools, and various applications throughout the software
development lifecycle, aiming to provide a solid knowledge
foundation for researchers in this field. We understand that
there have been previous English survey articles on LLM-
based agents for software engineering [37–40], which focus
on classifying technologies from an application perspec-
tive. However, we believe that despite varying application
scenarios, the underlying technical methods are common.
Therefore, this work differs from existing surveys in two
ways: First, we classify and introduce from a method-
ological perspective, providing relatively in-depth technical
references for research and development of code generation
agents; Second, given the rapid development of this field,
we focus on integrating the latest research advances and
challenges faced.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows: We
first introduce relevant background knowledge, technolog-
ical development, and core concepts. Then, we deeply ex-
plore key technologies of code generation agents (covering
both single-agent and multi-agent systems); subsequently,
we discuss specific applications and evaluation methods of
these code generation agents in software development and
catalog representative tools in the market; finally, the article
analyzes current challenges in the field and prospects for
future directions, providing a summary of the entire work.
2
LITERATURE COLLECTION AND TECHNOLOGI-
CAL DEVELOPMENT TREND ANALYSIS
2.1
Literature Collection
To ensure the completeness and comprehensiveness of the
research, this study employed systematic literature retrieval
methods to collect all relevant high-quality literature as
comprehensively as possible. This research selected author-
itative academic databases, including ACM Digital Library,
IEEE Xplore, SpringerLink, Google Scholar, DBLP Com-
puter Science Bibliography, and China National Knowledge
Infrastructure (CNKI), to conduct literature retrieval, ensur-
ing the comprehensiveness and authority of the retrieval
scope. The literature retrieval time span covered from 2022
to June 2025, encompassing important development stages
and the latest advances in this research field.
We adopted a bilingual retrieval strategy in both Chi-
nese and English. The Chinese and English search key-
word combination was ”(’Code Generation’ OR ’Software
Development’) AND (’LLM’ OR ’Large Language Model’
OR ’Large Model’ OR ’Language Model’) AND (’Agent’ OR
’Multi-agent’ OR ’Agentic’)”. The retrieval fields covered
titles, abstracts, keywords, and index terms. To ensure lit-
erature quality, the retrieval scope was limited to top-tier
international academic conferences and journals in software
engineering and artificial intelligence recommended by the
China Computer Federation (CCF), including ICSE, ISSTA,
ASE, FSE, TOSEM, TSE, ACL, ICML, ICLR, AAAI, and other
international top-tier conferences and journals, as well as
CCF-A Chinese journals such as Journal of Computer Re-
search and Development, Journal of Software, Science China
Information Sciences, and Chinese Journal of Computers.
Additionally, given the rapid development of this field,
to track the latest research developments, this study also col-
lected high-quality works published on preprint platforms
such as arXiv. This research further expanded the retrieval


3
scope through forward and backward snowball searching
for each piece of literature. Through the above retrieval
strategies, 447 candidate literature pieces were initially ob-
tained.
We screened the retrieved literature with five screen-
ing criteria: (1) Exclude duplicately published papers and
multiple versions of similar content from the same research
team to avoid content redundancy. (2) Manually evaluate
literature from preprint platforms like arXiv, retaining only
works with significant academic impact1 and innovation.
(3) Exclude books, dissertations, and conference short pa-
pers, retaining only complete academic papers published
in authoritative journals and conferences. (4) Focus on
technical innovation papers, excluding pure technical re-
ports, empirical surveys, and review literature. (5) Conduct
in-depth content analysis and manual review of initially
screened literature, eliminating literature with low relevance
to the research topic. The above screening rules ensured
high quality and high relevance of the literature collec-
tion: Rule (1) avoided research content redundancy; Rules
(2)(3)(4) focused on core technological breakthroughs and
frontier developments in the field; Rule (5) ensured high
matching between literature and research objectives. After
strict screening, 100 high-quality core literature pieces were
finally obtained, constituting the main analysis objects of
this research.
2.2
Technological Development Trend Analysis
Figure 1 shows the distribution of papers related to LLM-
based code generation agents. Figure 1(a) shows statistics
on the number of related papers published in different
years. From the data in Figure 1(a), it can be found that
the number of papers published in this field shows a year-
over-year increasing trend. Since its emergence in 2023, code
generation agents have shown tremendous potential, and
subsequently, the attention and research enthusiasm from
academia and industry have rapidly increased, with the
number of related studies also growing significantly. Fig-
ure 1(b) lists statistics on the number of related papers pub-
lished in top-tier academic conferences or journals each year
since the emergence of code generation agent technology.
Papers related to code generation agents appear not only in
top-tier software engineering conferences and journals (such
as ICSE, ASE, FSE, ISSTA, TOSEM) but are also frequently
accepted by mainstream conferences in natural language
processing and artificial intelligence (such as ACL, ICLR,
NeurIPS, ICML, AAAI), indicating that related research has
received widespread attention from multiple disciplinary
fields. Additionally, due to the rapid technological develop-
ment in this field and certain lag in traditional paper review
cycles, many research results are published as preprints on
arXiv, many of which have received high citation counts and
have had important impacts on field development.
1. The citation count of the literature exceeds the citation threshold
for hot papers in the SCI computer science discipline during the same
period https://esi.clarivate.com/ThresholdsAction.action.
3
BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE
3.1
Code Generation in Software Engineering
Code generation [9, 41, 42] refers to the process of auto-
matically converting structured or unstructured input in-
formation (i.e. natural language requirement descriptions,
system design documents, existing code snippets, etc.) into
source code. Its essence is to map abstract intentions or
task objectives to specific programming implementations,
aiming to reduce manual coding costs, improve develop-
ment efficiency, and to some extent reduce human errors,
ultimately achieving the goal of software development au-
tomation. This task typically requires that the generated
results are syntactically legal, semantically consistent with
expectations, and capable of running correctly in the target
environment.
The complexity and task diversity of modern software
development pose new requirements for code generation
technology to handle open and complex needs. Meanwhile,
the industry urgently expects to comprehensively integrate
code generation methods into development processes to
improve efficiency. Against this background, traditional
code generation techniques encounter three fundamental
limitations [43–45]. First, they lack sufficient contextual un-
derstanding, rendering them ineffective in processing open-
ended or high-level instructions. Second, their generative
capacity is limited, making it challenging to produce logi-
cally coherent and functionally complete code. Third, they
exhibit poor generality and flexibility, hindering their ability
to adapt to diverse software development tasks. In recent
years, the emergence of large language models has opened
new avenues for addressing these challenges.
3.2
Large Language Models
Large Language Models (LLMs) [46–49] are a class of pre-
trained language models based on deep learning technol-
ogy, primarily using the Transformer model [50] as the core
architecture. The basic idea is to learn statistical patterns, se-
mantic structures, and contextual relationships in language
through unsupervised pre-training on massive text corpora.
The core task of LLMs is typically conditional language
modeling, i.e., predicting subsequent tokens given context,
formally expressed as maximizing conditional probability
P(xt|x1, x2, · · · , xt−1). This mechanism enables LLMs to
possess powerful language understanding and generation
capabilities.
In the field of code generation, since training data
contains a large amount of high-quality open-source code
libraries and programming documentation, LLMs can learn
and master syntactic rules of multiple programming lan-
guages as well as common programming paradigms, while
understanding the mapping relationship between natu-
ral language descriptions and code logic, thereby achiev-
ing generation of executable code from natural language
descriptions, or intelligent completion and refactoring in
existing contexts. Typical code generation LLMs include
Codex [51], CodeLlama [? ], DeepSeek-Coder [52], and
Qwen2.5-Coder [53], etc., which have been widely applied
in software engineering scenarios such as code completion,
test code generation, and bug fixing, demonstrating power-
ful code generation and understanding capabilities.


4
arXiv(44)
ACL(12)
ICML(11)
ICLR(9)
ICSE(4)
NAACL(4)
NIPS(4)
AAAI(3)
EMNLP(3)
FSE(2)
TOSEM(2)
ASE(1)
ISSTA(1)
(a) Distribution of papers published by year
2023
2024
2025
(Jan - Jun)
Year
0
10
20
30
40
50
Number of published papers
14
46
40
(b) Distribution of papers published by conference or journal
Fig. 1: Distribution of papers related to LLM-based code generation agents.
In addition to basic language modeling capabilities,
LLMs also exhibit various important emergent abilities. First
is planning capability, where LLMs can generate natural lan-
guage plans to guide subsequent generation [54, 55]. Second
is tool usage capability, where LLMs can actively invoke ex-
ternal tools based on task requirements to enhance problem-
solving capabilities. By encapsulating available tool API
calls, existing work has been able to integrate various ex-
ternal tools, such as search engines [56], calculators [57],
and compilers [58], etc., to further expand the capability
boundaries of LLMs. Third is environmental interaction
capability, where LLMs have the ability to receive feedback
from external environments and execute operations accord-
ing to instructions, enabling perception, decision-making,
and action in dynamic environments [59, 60] .
3.3
LLM-based Agents
LLM-based Agents [61–64] are a class of system archi-
tectures that use LLMs as the core reasoning engine, in-
tegrating perception, memory, decision-making, and ac-
tion modules to enable models with autonomous task ex-
ecution capabilities. Agents, as a fundamental paradigm
in artificial intelligence, initially focused primarily on
perception-decision-execution loops under reinforcement
learning frameworks, emphasizing the interaction process
between models and environments and long-term reward
optimization. With the widespread success of LLMs in nat-
ural language reasoning tasks, researchers began attempt-
ing to use them as decision cores to construct LLM-based
agents. The language modeling capability of LLMs enables
them to directly process unstructured text instructions, un-
derstand complex semantic intentions, and in the absence
of explicit supervisory signals, autonomously organize and
execute tasks by combining environmental perception, lan-
guage planning, and tool invocation. Due to the complexity,
modularity, and collaborative nature of software engineer-
ing, the code generation field was among the first to see
applications of LLM-based agents.
LLM-based agents mainly include core components such
as planning, memory, tool usage, and reflection. The plan-
ning component is responsible for task decomposition,
breaking large tasks into smaller, manageable sub-goals,
thereby efficiently handling complex tasks. The memory
component is divided into short-term memory and long-
term memory, where short-term memory is implemented
through the context window of LLMs. Through prompt en-
gineering [65, 66], information directly related to the current
task is placed into this working memory, thereby guiding
the model’s immediate reasoning and behavior. Long-term
memory breaks through the capacity limitations of context
windows by constructing external persistent knowledge
bases. Current mainstream technical implementations adopt
the Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) [67, 68] frame-
work, encoding massive information into high-dimensional
vectors and storing them in dedicated vector databases.
When agents need to invoke historical experience or domain
knowledge, they can quickly locate and extract relevant
information through efficient vector similarity retrieval al-
gorithms. The reflection component allows agents to ex-
amine, evaluate, and correct their own generated content
or existing data, thereby improving past action decisions
and correcting previous errors for continuous improvement.
The tool usage component interacts with external physical
or digital environments, enabling agents to transcend their
native model limitations. Language models themselves are
closed systems with knowledge cutoff dates and lack the
ability to perform computations or invoke external APIs.
The tool usage module greatly enhances their action space
by granting agents permission to invoke external functions
or APIs.


5
2020
2022
2023
2024
2025 (By June)
ChatGPT (11-3)
GPT-3 (5-28)
Self-Planning (3-12)
Self-Refine (3-30)
Self-Debug (4-11)
Self-Edit (5-6)
Self-Repair (6-16)
CodeAgent (1-14) 
CodePori (2-2)
CleanAgent (3-13)
RepairAgent (3-25)
SoA (4-2)
AutoCodeRover (4-8)
MARE (5-6)
SWE-agent (5-6)
MapCoder (5-18)
AgileCoder (6-16)
OpenHands (7-23)
PairCoder (9-8)
HyperAgent (9-9)
AutoSafeCoder (9-16)
SWE-Search (10-26)
CodeTree (11-7)
CodeCoR (1-14)
PatchPilot (2-4)
CodeSim (2-8)
SyncMind (2-10)
AIDE (2-18)
DARS (3-18)
MARCO (5-6)
AdverIntent-Agent (5-19)
SEW (5-24)
Self-Collaboration (4-15)
ChatDev (7-16)
WebAgent (7-24)
MetaGPT (8-1)
CodePlan (9-21)
LATS (10-6)
Lemur (10-10)
Fig. 2: Evolution of key technologies in LLM-based code generation agents, where works not marked in yellow are
important prerequisite technologies.
From the perspective of composition and interaction
complexity, agent systems can be divided into single-agent
and multi-agent categories.
• Single Agent: Refers to an independent centralized
agent that autonomously completes all tasks through
its inherent planning, tool usage, and reflection capabil-
ities. There is no complexity of inter-agent interaction.
• Multi-Agent: Refers to systems composed of multi-
ple heterogeneous or homogeneous agents. In multi-
agent systems, goals are achieved through communica-
tion, collaboration, and negotiation between agents. In
multi-agent systems, role-based professional division of
labor is a common collaborative enhancement strategy.
By assigning specific roles to different agents (such as
”analyst”, ”programmer”, ”tester”), problems that far
exceed the capabilities of individual agents in scale and
complexity can be solved.
3.4
Differences Between LLMs and LLM-based Agents
LLMs and LLM-based agents exhibit architectural and capa-
bility differences when solving code generation tasks [37],
specifically:
The core advantage of LLMs lies in their powerful con-
textual generation capabilities [69, 70], enabling them to
efficiently predict and output semantically coherent code
snippets based on given inputs. However, their operation
is essentially a single, passive response process. Models
receive inputs, generate outputs based on their pre-trained
knowledge, and the entire process lacks active planning,
state maintenance, or continuous interaction with external
environments. This limits their performance when handling
complex, ambiguous, or multi-step collaborative software
development tasks.
LLM-based agents, on the other hand, construct a dy-
namic workflow with autonomy, interactivity, and itera-
tivity, integrating the generation capabilities of LLMs into
an intelligent system capable of active planning, execution,
observation, and adjustment. In the field of code gener-
ation, LLM-based agents not only utilize the generation
capabilities of LLMs but also endow them with capabilities
for task decomposition [71, 72], tool invocation (such as
compilers, API documentation queries) [73, 74], and self-
correction based on feedback (such as execution errors, user
feedback) [75, 76]. LLMs serve as reasoning engines in agent
frameworks, responsible for making decisions based on
current environmental states and determining next actions,
thereby driving tasks to gradual completion.
4
KEY TECHNOLOGIES AND METHODS
This chapter introduces the key technologies and methods
of LLM-based code generation agents, divided into two
main categories: single-agent code generation methods and
multi-agent code generation systems. Single-agent methods
form the foundation for building multi-agent systems. We
will first introduce three key technologies in single-agent
systems, including planning and reasoning techniques, tool
integration and retrieval enhancement, and reflection and
self-improvement mechanisms. In the multi-agent code gen-
eration systems section, we will focus on collaboration
mechanisms between agents, expanding from three aspects:
how to arrange workflows in code generation agent sys-
tems, how to achieve efficient information interaction and


6
management between agents, and how to transform mul-
tiple agents into a more capable overall system through
collaborative optimization. We have organized the key tech-
nologies and methods chronologically, as shown in Figure 2.
4.1
Single-Agent Code Generation Methods
4.1.1
Planning and Reasoning Techniques
Explicit planning is widely recognized as one of the key
pathways to enhance the structured reasoning capabilities of
LLMs. Self-Planning [10] was the first approach to system-
atically introduce the planning phase into code generation
tasks. In this framework, the model is required to first
produce a sequence of high-level solution steps prior to
generating any executable code. It then implements each
step according to the predefined plan, enabling the decom-
position of complex problems and mitigating the overall
difficulty of code synthesis.
Building on this foundation, CodeChain [11] introduced
clustering and self-revision in the planning phase, guiding
the model to construct reusable modular code through
multiple iterations. Subsequently, CodeAct [77] introduces
a unified action space for the agent by representing all
actions as executable Python code. By integrating a Python
interpreter into the agent architecture, CodeAct enables
immediate code execution, real-time feedback from the
environment, and dynamic adjustment of actions through
multi-turn interactions. KareCoder [78] achieves external
knowledge injection by integrating knowledge from li-
braries into the planning and reasoning process of LLMs.
WebAgent [79] extended the planning mechanism to web
automation scenarios, introducing a structured three-stage
strategy: instruction decomposition, HTML content sum-
marization, and program synthesis. It leverages LLMs to
decompose natural language instructions into standard-
ized sub-instructions, extract task-relevant information from
lengthy HTML documents, and generate executable Python
programs accordingly. Meanwhile, CodePlan [80] intro-
duced multi-stage control flow and combined with custom
control instructions, enabling the model to dynamically se-
lect ”generate” or ”modify” operations during the reasoning
process.
Enhancing the breadth and diversity exploration capa-
bilities of candidate solutions is another important direction
in single-agent framework development. To this end, GIF-
MCTS [81] introduced Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
mechanisms into the code generation process, systemati-
cally exploring multiple potential generation paths. This
method constructs decision trees through multiple sampling
in each generation round, combined with execution feed-
back to score and filter each candidate branch, not only
expanding the solution space but also significantly improv-
ing the robustness and generalization capabilities of the
model in multi-solution tasks. As a representative reasoning
enhancement strategy, GIF-MCTS achieved a transition from
single-path planning to multi-path parallel reasoning.
Building on the above methods, PlanSearch [55] first for-
malized the planning process as an explicit search task, gen-
erating multiple sets of candidate plans and conducting par-
allel evaluation during the reasoning phase to find optimal
solutions within a larger solution space. In terms of plan-
ning structure, both CodeTree [82] and Tree-of-Code [83]
extended previous linear structures to tree structures. Code-
Tree organizes the code generation process into a unified
tree structure that explicitly models the sequential stages
of strategy exploration, solution generation, and iterative
refinement. By incorporating execution-based feedback at
each stage, it enables dynamic scoring and heuristic-guided
pruning to efficiently navigate the large search space. Tree-
of-Code explores multiple potential paths through breadth-
first generation strategies and combines execution signals
for branch pruning. Subsequently, Multi-stage guided code
generation for Large Language Models [84] emphasize di-
viding the planning process into multi-stage control, in-
troducing hierarchical objectives and intermediate reward
signals to alleviate goal drift problems in end-to-end gener-
ation processes. Based on this, DARS [85] further adopts
adaptive tree structures to enhance the decision process,
branching new planning paths at key decision nodes of orig-
inal planning paths based on code execution feedback, and
dynamically selecting better planning paths by combining
historical trajectories with execution results. Additionally,
for hardware tasks, VerilogCoder [86] introduced graph-
structured planning mechanisms and waveform tracing
tools based on abstract syntax trees, supporting structural
modeling and semantic verification of Verilog code, demon-
strating the adaptive potential of planning paradigms in
cross-modal and domain-specific tasks. To address the chal-
lenge that traditional search methods are difficult to apply in
non-serializable environments, Guided Search [87] proposes
two complementary strategies, namely one-step lookahead
and trajectory selection. Both strategies are guided by a
learned action-value estimator, where the model predicts
potential next-step outcomes to evaluate candidate actions,
and selects promising solution trajectories based on their
empirical success rates. This enables effective exploration
without relying on environment state serialization.
In summary, these methods reflect a shift from single-
path to multi-path exploration, and from linear to struc-
tured planning. They highlight the growing importance
of planning techniques in enhancing the effectiveness and
flexibility of single-agent code generation approaches.
4.1.2
Tool Integration and Retrieval Enhancement
Integrating external tools with LLMs is one of the keys for
single agents to break through their own generation capabil-
ity boundaries. Building on Toolformer [57], ToolCoder [73]
proposed a code generation method that combines API
search tools with LLMs. To achieve accurate tool invoca-
tion, ToolCoder automatically annotates training data, en-
abling the model to learn to use search tools to actively
query APIs, effectively alleviating API invocation errors
caused by model hallucinations. ToolGen [29] integrated
automatic completion tools into the code generation process
of LLMs, solving dependency problems in code generation
(i.e., undefined variables and member errors) through of-
fline model fine-tuning and online automatic completion
tool integration. To further enhance the ability of LLMs to
handle complex requirements and complex dependencies
in projects, CodeAgent [28] integrated five programming
tools for the model (including website search, document


7
Single-Agent Code Generation
Query
Create a quick-sort 
algorithm in Python.
Planning
Tools
Reflection
def QuickSort(nums):
```
Sort a list of numbers in 
ascending order using the 
QuickSort algorithm
```
Output
Planning and Reasoning Techniques
Tool Integration and Retrieval Enhancement
Reflection and Self-Improvement
Candidate Branch Selection
External Tool 
Integration
Retrieval Augmented 
Generation
Failure Diagnosis
Create a quick-sort 
algorithm in Python.
Query
Agent
Generating the 
Optimal Plan
Agent
Plan
Compiler
Online
 Searching
Static 
Analysis
Step 1：Vector Database Retrieval
Step 2：Prompt Augmentation
Step 3：LLM-based Code Generation
def QuickSort(nums):
```
Sort a list of numbers in 
ascending order using the 
QuickSort algorithm
```
Generated Code
Agent
The numbers should be 
sorted in ascending order.
√ Refined!
LLM-Based Agent
Autonomous Refinement
Planned Path Generation
Fig. 3: Overview of single-agent code generation methods
reading, code symbol navigation, format checker, code in-
terpreter), supporting interaction with software components
to achieve information retrieval, code implementation, and
code testing functions. In terms of tool feedback mecha-
nisms, ROCODE [88] introduces a closed-loop mechanism
that integrates code generation, real-time error detection,
and adaptive backtracking. During the generation process,
ROCODE continuously monitors the compilation output
and automatically initiates backtracking when syntax errors
are detected. It further employs static program analysis
to identify the minimal necessary modification scope, en-
abling efficient and targeted rewriting. To enhance step-by-
step control of tool invocation, CodeTool [89] introduced
process-level supervision mechanisms, explicitly modeling
and supervising each step of tool invocation processes,
improving the accuracy and robustness of tool invocation,
and efficiently integrating tool feedback into the generation
process through incremental debugging strategies.
In recent years, Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
methods have also emerged as a form of external tool in-
vocation. RAG methods retrieve relevant information from
knowledge bases or code repositories before generation to
construct richer contexts, thereby alleviating limitations of
knowledge, model hallucinations, and data security issues.
In this direction, RepoHyper [74] established repository-
level vector retrieval systems, supporting the location of
reusable code segments from large-scale code bases and
using them as context for joint generation, effectively im-
proving the control from the model over long-distance
dependencies. To enable agents to no longer rely on pre-
registered function APIs and other tools, CodeNav [90] au-
tomatically indexes past real repositories based on require-
ments during code generation, importing relevant functions
and code blocks, and adjusting based on execution result
feedback. Meanwhile, AUTOPATCH [91] applied RAG to
runtime performance optimization problems, combining
historical code examples with control flow graph (CFG)
analysis for context-aware learning, and optimizing code
through contextual prompts to models. Building on this,
to improve the structured expression capability of retrieval
contexts, Knowledge Graph Based Repository-Level Code
Generation [92] proposed representing code repositories
as knowledge graphs, improving retrieval quality from
structural and relational perspectives, achieving over 10%
improvement in project-level code generation tasks, demon-
strating the importance of structure-aware retrieval for high
contextual accuracy. Furthermore, cAST [93] addressed the
”chunking” problem in RAG pipelines by proposing a
structured chunking mechanism based on abstract syntax
trees (AST), improving the syntactic completeness of code
retrieval through recursive partitioning and semantic coher-
ent block merging, significantly improving metrics such as
Recall and Pass@1.
In specific domains, tool integration design exhibits
stronger
structural
constraints
and
domain
coupling.
AnalogCoder [94], facing analog circuit design tasks, pro-
posed encapsulating simulator functions and language
models as ”circuit library” invocation interfaces, and de-
signed feedback enhancement and subcircuit reuse mech-
anisms, enabling the model to complete structurally rea-
sonable circuit generation without additional training. Sim-
ilarly, VerilogCoder [86] focused on hardware code gen-
eration, achieving cross-stage logic verification and fine-
grained control by integrating syntax tree-level waveform
tracing tools, maintaining consistency and adjustability of
generation in complex hardware logic relationships. These


8
vertical domain integration solutions demonstrate the enor-
mous potential of tool invocation in professional task mod-
eling and provide transferable insights for tool fusion design
in general scenarios.
In summary, single agents effectively expand their per-
ception range and execution capabilities through external
tool integration and retrieval enhancement, improving the
accuracy, efficiency, and consistency of model generation,
constructing tool invocation solutions from general tasks to
domain-specific tasks.
4.1.3
Reflection and Self-Improvement
Reflection and self-improvement mechanisms offer an ef-
fective approach for enhancing code generation in single-
agent systems. Unlike one-shot generation methods, these
approaches enable the model to review its intermediate
outputs, provide internal feedback, and iteratively refine
the code during the generation process. By mimicking the
human process of generating, evaluating, and revising code,
they help improve the overall correctness and quality of the
final output.
To address the limitations of one-step generation, such
as the frequent occurrence of bugs and logical errors, Self-
Refine [75] introduces an iterative refinement framework.
After generating an initial output, the model performs nat-
ural language self-evaluation to identify potential issues.
Based on this feedback, it revises the output to improve
quality. This approach requires no additional training or
supervision and has demonstrated strong generality and
effectiveness across a range of tasks, including code gener-
ation and logical reasoning. Self-Iteration [95] builds upon
prior reflection-based methods by addressing the problem
of error accumulation in complex code generation tasks. It
introduces a structured iterative framework that integrates
principles from software development, assigning roles such
as analyst, designer, developer, and tester to guide the
generation process. In each iteration, the model refines
requirements, adjusts design, and revises code based on
feedback from prior outputs. This role-based approach helps
the model identify flawed module structures and progres-
sively improve code readability and functional complete-
ness. Addressing the difficulty of model self-diagnosis in the
absence of feedback conditions, Self-Debug [96] introduced
ideas analogous to ”rubber duck debugging”, using few-
shot examples to guide the model to perform line-by-line
explanation of its own generated code to identify errors,
achieving automatic debugging and modification mecha-
nisms without external feedback, significantly improving
accuracy and sample utilization efficiency in multiple code
tasks. Self-Edit [76] proposed a fault-aware code editor that
can perform secondary editing on generated code by LLMs
after combining execution feedback information, thereby
improving the accuracy of code generation for numerous
LLMs. Self-Repair [97] combines code models with feedback
models for program repair. The code model generates pro-
grams based on user-provided specifications and test cases.
If the program fails tests, the feedback model generates
explanatory text to help the code model understand error
causes and complete repairs accordingly.
To address issues of structural disorganization in com-
plex programs, CodeChain [11] introduces a modular self-
revision framework that promotes structured and main-
tainable code generation. The method guides the model
to iteratively refine code by first identifying and cluster-
ing representative sub-modules from initial outputs, and
then leveraging these sub-modules to enhance subsequent
generations. Through this iterative process, the model is
encouraged to reuse verified components, thereby improv-
ing the modularity, logical coherence, and correctness of the
generated programs. Building on this, LeDeX [98] enhances
the closed-loop self-debugging framework by enabling the
model to perform stepwise annotation and analysis of er-
roneous code, followed by generating repair solutions and
verifying their correctness through execution results. Addi-
tionally, LeDeX collects data generated during this iterative
process to construct high-quality training datasets. These
datasets are then used to fine-tune open-source models,
significantly improving their code repair capabilities.
Overall, current research has formed a relatively clear
technical system in reflection and self-improvement mech-
anisms: from natural language-level self-feedback to auto-
matic repair combined with execution results, to module-
level optimization based on program structure and multi-
solution evaluation. These methods not only improve the
performance capabilities of single-agent systems in code
generation tasks but also provide support for subsequent
in-depth research in test-time/inference-time computational
scaling and multi-agent collaboration.
4.2
Multi-Agent Code Generation Systems
4.2.1
Multi-Agent System Workflows
Multi-agent
system
workflows
mainly
include
four
types: pipeline-based labor division, hierarchical planning-
execution mechanisms, self-negotiation circular optimiza-
tion, and self-evolving structural updates.
In the pipeline-based division of labor paradigm, each
agent is responsible for a specific stage in the software
development process and passes intermediate products to
the next agent for processing. The process shows obvious
sequentiality. Self-Collaboration [15], which builds upon the
traditional waterfall model used in software engineering.
It defines a classic three-stage multi-agent process that in-
cludes ”requirement analysis,” ”coding implementation,”
and ”testing”. In this process, agents work independently
at each stage to complete their respective tasks and pass
the results to the subsequent stage. Building on this, Agent-
Coder [71] also constructs a three-stage pipeline system
consisting of ”programmer”, ”test designer”, and ”test ex-
ecutor” agents. This system effectively improves the cor-
rectness and executability of code generation through struc-
tured task decomposition and test feedback. CodePori [99]
introduces a set of agent roles, including the manager,
developer, finalizer, and verifier. In this framework, the
manager agent is tasked with parsing natural language re-
quirements and decomposing the tasks. Multiple developer
agents work in parallel to write code for different modules,
followed by multiple finalizer agents who refine the code.
Finally, the verifier agent performs integration testing to
ensure the system’s functionality. Additionally, MAGIS [100]
tackles repository maintenance tasks and further expands


9
Set up a RESTful API in Flask with a 
login endpoint and JWT authentication.
Multi-Agent Code Generation
Query
Multi-Agent System
Workflow
Context 
Management Collaboration
@app.route('/login', methods=['POST'])
def login():
    # Validate user credentials
    # Return JWT token on success
Output
Multi-Agent System Workflows
Context Management and Memory Technologies
Collaborative Optimization
 Pipeline-Based
Planner
Editor
Executor
 Hierarchical
High-level 
Task Planning
Low-level 
Execution
 Self-Negotiation
Code
Generation
Reflection &
Optimization
 Self-Evolving
Self-Evolve
Context
Information
 Blackboard Model
 Decoupled Modules
 Brain-Like Mechanism
 Dynamic Agent Numbers
 Dual Collaboration
 Declarative Memory Modules
Maintain 
Contextual Memory
Multi-Agent 
Collaboration
 Collect Behavioral Data
 Mutual Evaluation
 State Synchronization
 Group Discussion
Optimize
Collaboration
Edit
Execute
Plan
Edit
Execute
Fig. 4: Overview of multi-agent code generation systems
pipeline complexity. It models project managers, maintain-
ers, developers, and quality assurance personnel in the
GitHub development process as four agent roles respec-
tively. The system can complete GitHub Issue tracking,
assignment, and repair, demonstrating feasibility in real
project scenarios. Meanwhile, HyperAgent [72] focuses on
cross-language, cross-task code generation problems. This
framework transforms natural language requirements into
runnable programs through collaboration between planner,
navigator, code editor, and executor agents. Meanwhile, it
introduces automatic tool chain retrieval mechanisms to
improve code generality and transferability. The advantage
of this pipeline-based method lies in its clear structure
and distinct responsibilities, facilitating system design and
debugging. However, they would be limited by serial de-
pendencies when handling complex tasks and lack global
feedback.
Unlike sequential pipelines, the hierarchical planning-
execution paradigm emphasizes task decomposition by
higher-level agents and specific implementation by lower-
level agents. PairCoder [101] simulates collaborative pair
programmers, designing two collaborative agents: Naviga-
tor for planning and Driver for specific implementation.
Navigator is responsible for proposing promising solution
methods, selecting the current optimal solutions, and guid-
ing next iterations based on execution feedback. Driver
follows the guidance from Navigator for initial code genera-
tion, code testing, and refinement. FlowGen [102] simulates
various classic software engineering models (such as Wa-
terfall, TDD, Scrum), designing a four-layer agent structure
of ”requirement engineer”, ”architect”, ”developer”, and
”tester”. The system gradually advances development tasks
through staged planning and goal verification. Its flexibility
under diverse development paradigms makes it a workflow
framework with good scalability. Building on this, SoA [27]
introduces dynamic agent scheduling mechanisms. Based
on task complexity and resource usage, the system can
spontaneously expand or contract the number of agents,
achieving efficient generation and management of large-
scale code bases. This self-organizing structure improves
system robustness and adaptability, particularly suitable for
code construction in heterogeneous task scenarios. Addi-
tionally, MAGE [103] is a multi-layer architecture system for
RTL hardware code generation. By decomposing high-level
goals into micro-operations and assigning them to different
agents, MAGE not only demonstrates the generality of
hierarchical structures but also validates the transferability
of this paradigm on different types of code (such as Verilog).
In more complex and uncertain tasks, self-negotiation
circular optimization mechanisms center on negotiation,
reflection, and self-feedback, continuously improving code
quality and robustness through multiple rounds of interac-
tion. Some systems choose to have multiple agents evaluate,
optimize, and repair candidate solutions in parallel or itera-
tive ways. MapCoder [104] employs a cycle of four special-
ized agents that work together to recall relevant examples,
formulate a solution plan, generate the corresponding code,
and then debug any errors. In each iteration, these agents
collaborate to produce code and identify defects for repair.
By repeating this process multiple times, MapCoder steadily


10
enhances solution quality and maintains stable performance
on tasks that require several steps. Subsequently, AutoSafe-
Coder [105] designed a framework including coder, static
analyzer, and fuzzer, where the coder continuously revises
code based on feedback from static security detection by
the static analyzer and dynamic security detection by the
fuzzer. QualityFlow [106] organizes a team of LLM agents
that first generate unit tests, then apply an LLM-based
Quality Checker to imagine whether the code and tests
meet the requirements, and finally execute those tests to
confirm correctness. Meanwhile, CodeCoR [12] introduced
a ”self-reflection” scoring mechanism. The framework adds
reflection agents between code generation, testing, and re-
pair stages to score and locate problems in intermediate
products. Then, the results are fed back to preceding agents
for the next round optimization. This circular mechanism,
based on self-supervised feedback, effectively improved the
adaptive capabilities of the model. For high-performance
computing fields, MARCO [107] proposes a multi-agent
code optimization framework focusing on improving the
performance of LLM-generated code in parallelism, mem-
ory efficiency, and architectural adaptability. The system
separately sets code generation agents and performance
evaluation agents, continuously optimizing code execution
efficiency through feedback loops.
As system complexity increases, some work has begun
to further explore self-evolutionary mechanisms of multi-
agent system structures, allowing systems to spontaneously
and dynamically adjust structures and behavioral strategies.
SEW [108] proposed workflow self-evolution mechanisms,
where systems can dynamically reorganize communication
paths and responsibility divisions based on collaboration ef-
fectiveness between agents and failure feedback. This mech-
anism no longer relies on manually set fixed structures but
achieves workflow-level adaptive adjustment through run-
time learning and reconstruction. EvoMAC [109], inspired
by neural network training processes, compares code gen-
eration results with target requirements to obtain text-form
feedback from the environment. It designs an innovative
”text backpropagation” mechanism to automatically adjust
collaboration structures and behavioral strategies between
agents.
Additionally, in practical applications, multi-agent sys-
tems often improve collaboration effectiveness through
”role-playing” mechanisms. Role-playing refers to adding
specific identity settings in prompts, such as programmers,
testers, project managers, or code reviewers. This mech-
anism makes agent behavior more consistent with corre-
sponding role responsibilities and thinking patterns. The
system designs corresponding prompt strategies for each
role, enabling them to perform their duties in collaboration
and form clear division of labor processes. For example,
agents in the ChatDev [16] system respectively play roles
of programmers, reviewers, and testers. MetaGPT [17] con-
structs an agent team including roles such as product man-
agers, architects, project managers, and engineers, simulat-
ing a complete software company organizational structure.
The implementation of the above workflows and role-
playing typically relies on the design of system prompts.
The LLM behind each agent understands its current tasks
and responsibilities based on preset prompt information.
These prompts typically include task division, output re-
quirements, input formats, interface invocation methods,
and output formats. This mechanism not only helps lan-
guage models understand their current task roles but also
improves interaction stability by limiting behavioral scope.
4.2.2
Context Management and Memory Technologies
Multi-agent systems in code generation tasks frequently rely
on sharing and referencing long-range dependency informa-
tion such as task descriptions, historical modifications, and
intermediate products. Therefore, how to effectively main-
tain a writable, readable, and scalable global context space is
an important factor determining system upper limits. Self-
Collaboration [15] is the first system to introduce the black-
board model into code generation tasks. This method es-
tablishes an explicit shared memory space for storing struc-
tured information such as task descriptions, intermediate
generation results, and code revision records. All agents can
read or update blackboard content based on task types as
needed and make subsequent decisions accordingly, form-
ing collaboration flows based on shared views. Compared to
traditional unidirectional message passing, the blackboard
model significantly enhances interaction flexibility between
agents.
Subsequently, L2MAC [110] draws inspiration from the
von Neumann architecture, designing decoupled instruction
registers and file storage modules. This system introduces
explicit control units to precisely control the scheduling and
writing of context content. It organizes context information
by program units, effectively breaking through the context
window limitations of language models. Therefore, L2MAC
enables generation tasks to span longer code structures and
demonstrates good context retention capabilities when han-
dling large functions, multi-file projects, and other complex
situations. The Cogito [111] system further draws from the
three-stage cognition-memory-growth model in neurobiol-
ogy and designs a brain-like context organization mecha-
nism. Its core idea is to divide context information into three
structural categories: short-term memory, long-term knowl-
edge base, and evolutionary growth units. Respectively,
these three information categories are responsible for im-
mediate state maintenance during task execution, accumu-
lation of common knowledge, and continuous enhancement
of abstract capabilities. This bionic memory system not only
enhances the hierarchical sense of context but also provides
agents with self-evolution and continuous learning capabili-
ties. Meanwhile, SoA [27] introduces a self-organized multi-
agent framework that automatically scales the agent pool ac-
cording to task complexity. Each agent works within its own
fixed-size context window, while a central controller keeps
subspaces of all agents structurally aligned. By growing the
number of agents without increasing individual workloads,
SoA prevents information sparsity and confusion, enabling
efficient and scalable generation of large codebases.
Besides general technical innovations, some systems
have also been designed with more targeted context op-
timization mechanisms combined with task requirements.
GameGPT [112] addresses the problem of frequent repetitive
information in multi-round game development tasks. It
adopts a ”dual collaboration” mechanism to reduce redun-
dant context retransmission, improving context manage-


11
ment efficiency. CleanAgent [113] constructed a declarative
API memory module based on the Dataprep.Clean library,
enabling the system to extract domain knowledge from his-
torical invocation trajectories and reuse it for current tasks,
demonstrating the combination of context mechanisms with
domain knowledge.
4.2.3
Collaborative Optimization of Multi-Agents
As multi-agent systems in code generation tasks have devel-
oped increasingly mature, research has begun to focus on
how to further improve collaboration capabilities between
agents. Such methods can be collectively termed ”collabo-
rative optimization”. To be specific, they introduce team-
level collaboration modeling mechanisms during training
to jointly optimize the behavior of multiple agents, thereby
improving overall performance metrics. Currently, collabo-
rative optimization remains an emerging research direction
with limited related methods and immature technical sys-
tems.
An early representative in this direction is Lingma SWE-
GPT [114]. Lingma SWE-GPT simulates real software de-
velopment processes by dividing tasks into three stages:
codebase understanding, fault localization, and patch gener-
ation, with each stage corresponding to a sub-task agent. To
achieve collaborative optimization between agents, Lingma
SWE-GPT first collects behavioral data from multiple-stage
agents, including reasoning processes, tool invocations, and
final results. Then, it optimizes the entire system through
supervised fine-tuning, thereby improving multi-stage col-
laboration quality and overall performance.
CodeCoR [12] establishes a loop of generation, testing,
and repair across four dedicated agents for prompts, code,
test cases, and repair suggestions. During training, each
agent produces multiple candidates and evaluates outputs
from other agents. Then, low-quality prompts, code snip-
pets, tests, and repair advice are pruned based on these mu-
tual assessments. This iterative feedback mechanism sharp-
ens collaboration and yields more reliable code synthesis.
Additionally, SyncMind [115] takes a system-level view of
agent collaboration by tackling the common issue of “out-
of-sync” states that arise when multiple agents update a
shared codebase. It introduces three complementary evalua-
tion dimensions to study how agents recognize and recover
from state drift. These multidimensional mechanisms enrich
our understanding of how to optimize collaborative coding
workflows.
To alleviate the problem of error propagation during col-
laboration caused by agent hallucinations, CANDOR [116]
coordinates multiple agents, including planners and re-
viewers. Specifically, CANDOR adopts group discussion
strategies to generate accurate reference answers based on
consensus among multiple reviewer agents.
5
APPLICATIONS OF LLM-BASED CODE GENERA-
TION AGENTS IN SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT TASKS
Recent studies
[31, 76, 107, 117, 118] show that code-
generation agents have evolved well beyond their tradi-
tional role. Today, they support multiple stages of the
software-development lifecycle, including automated code
writing, debugging and repair, test-code generation, refac-
toring and optimization, and even requirement clarification.
5.1
Automated Code Generation and Implementation
Automated code generation and implementation have be-
come a key technology for improving software engineer-
ing efficiency and quality. With the help of code genera-
tion agents, researchers are gradually transforming a large
amount of repetitive code writing and debugging work
traditionally done manually into automated processes [79,
108, 117, 119]. Currently, the automation level of code gen-
eration has expanded from function-level code generation
to cross-module, multi-file incremental code evolution, and
has further developed into end-to-end project construction
oriented toward natural language requirements.
Function-level code generation requires agents to auto-
matically generate functionally correct code segments. Self-
Planning [10] is the first work to enable agents to automat-
ically perform task decomposition and formulate execution
steps to reduce the coding difficulty of complex require-
ments. CodeChain [11] achieves modular code generation
using chain-based self-revision mechanisms. FlowGen [102]
configures a series of different development process models,
enabling agents to implement software development modes
such as the waterfall model, test-driven development, and
agile development according to different role sequences or
collaboration processes. PairCoder [101] adopts a pair pro-
gramming mode, generating multiple code generation paths
through multi-round cycles of agents. CodeTree [82] adopts
tree-structured search and verification mechanisms, reduc-
ing failure rates when handling complex code generation
tasks. CodeCoR [12] can actively evaluate and reflect on the
quality of generated code and initiate automatic correction
processes when errors occur. QualityFlow [26] introduces
imagination execution mechanisms to achieve rapid quality
checking of generated code, saving code execution time in
real testing processes. CodeSim [120] and MapCoder [104]
simulate human development, improving correctness and
efficiency in long code generation and complex problem-
solving processes. DARS [85] can dynamically adjust gener-
ation results based on code execution feedback, achieving a
higher 47% Pass@1 rate on the SWE-Bench Lite benchmark
compared to previous linear generation or random multi-
sampling code generation methods.
Repository-level code generation requires agents to auto-
matically generate and maintain large, complex codebases,
including multiple modules and files. One type of work
focuses on enabling agents to incrementally add function-
ality based on understanding existing code structures and
module responsibilities. For example, AgileCoder [122] and
AgileAgent [14] progressively develop software systems by
simulating human agile development processes. Another
type of work hopes that agents can generate code from
scratch based on requirements. The Self-Collaboration [15]
framework enables a single ChatGPT instance to simulate
roles at different stages of software development and in-
corporates software development methodologies, achieving
project development without human intervention. Chat-
Dev [16] reduces hallucination problems in generated code
by having multiple agents communicate through code snip-
pets during the debugging phase. MetaGPT [17] simulates
real development teams executing multiple development
tasks, automatically allocating resources and scheduling


12
Applications of LLM-based
Code Generation Agents
Automated Code
Generation and
Implementation 5.1
Function-Level
Code Generation
Self-Planning [10], LATS [117], Lemur [119], CodeChain [11], MapCoder [104],
FlowGen [102], PairCoder [101], CodeTree [82], CodeCoR [12],
QualityFlow [26], CodeSim [120], DARS [85], SEW [108]
Repository-Level
Code Generation
Self-Collabration[15], ChatDev[16], Webagent[79], MetaGPT[17],
CodePlan[80], CodeAgent[28], CodePoRi[13], GameGPT[112], CodeS[121],
SoA[27], ToolGen[29], AgileCoder[122], AgileAgent[14],
Automated
Debugging and
Program Repair 5.2
Self-Refine[75], Self-Debug[96], Self-Edit[76], Self-Repair[97], RepairAgent[123],
AutoCodeRover[124], SWE-Agent[125], MAGIS[100], AutoSafeCoder[126], SWE-Search[127],
HyperAgent[72], SQLFixAgent[128], OrcaLoca[129], PatchPilot[130], Thinking-Longer[131],
AdverIntentAgent[132], Nemotron-CORTEXA[133]
Automated Test
Code Generation5.3
Automated Test
Case Generation
TestPilot[31], CANDOR[32], XUAT-Copilot[20], LogiAgent[21],
SeedMind[35], ACH[36]
Automated
Execution and
Analysis
AUITestAgent[134], HEPH[135]
Automated Code
Refactoring and
Optimization 5.4
Structural Code
Refactoring
DataClump-Pipeline[22], iSMELL[136], EM-assist[137], HaskellAgent[138]
Code Performance
Optimization
AIDE[139], MARCO[107], LASSI-EE[33], SysLLMatic[34]
Automated
Requirement
Clarification 5.5
MARE[118], ClarifyGPT[19], TiCoder[140], SpecFix[141], InterAgent[142], HiLDe[143]
Fig. 5: Overview of applications of LLM-based code generation agents in software development tasks
development sequences. CodePoRi [13] uses multi-agents
to simulate different roles in real software development
processes, thereby generating relatively large-scale soft-
ware systems at low cost. GameGPT [112] achieves auto-
matic construction from natural language descriptions to
runnable games, enabling non-programmer users to quickly
develop game content through conversational interaction.
CodeS [121] overcomes structural confusion and semantic
incoherence problems that easily occur in end-to-end large-
scale code generation by pre-generating repository structure
sketches. SoA [27] constructs a multi-code generation agent
system that does not require manual central schedulers.
Additionally, some work focuses on improving the ability of
agents to invoke external tools to better operate codebases.
CodeAgent [28] integrates five programming tools, enabling
code generation agents to retrieve third-party dependencies
in multi-file structures and implement function generation
and completion for inter-module calls. ToolGen [29] con-
structs code generation agents with plugin capabilities that
can automatically select and invoke corresponding tools
based on scenarios and functional needs.
5.2
Automated Debugging and Program Repair
Automated debugging and repair technology can effectively
reduce software defects and improve system stability [75,
76, 96]. The emergence of code generation agents is driving
automated program repair from the classic ”test-driven
patch generation” toward a higher stage of ”autonomous
defect diagnosis and semantic repair” [97, 124, 125, 127].
RepairAgent [123] provides 14 repair tools commonly
used by developers, guiding agent decisions and tool in-
vocations through finite state machines. This system suc-
cessfully automatically repairs 164 defects on Defects4J.
MAGIS [100] uses multi-agents to simulate the planning
and coding phases in the GitHub Issue resolution process,
improving the GitHub Issue resolution rate to 13.94% on
SWE-Bench. Similarly, HyperAgent [72] uses multi-agents
to cover the complete lifecycle from problem decomposition
to patch verification, achieving leading performance at the
time on multiple benchmarks, including SWE-Bench-Lite,
RepoExec, and Defects4J, with good cross-task and cross-
language generalization capabilities. SQLFixAgent [128] can
capture deviations between SQL statements and user inten-
tions, provide diverse repair candidates, and select optimal
repair solutions based on failure memories and similar
repair histories. AutoSafeCoder [126] uses dual feedback
from static security detection and fuzzing dynamic security
detection to guide agents in continuously revising code,
reducing vulnerability rates by approximately 13% on Se-
curityEval and improving code security. OrcaLoca [129]
improves problem localization accuracy and overall repair
effectiveness in complex code repositories by introducing
strategies such as priority scheduling, action decomposition,
and context pruning. PatchPilot [130] can use efficient local-
ization strategies to quickly find vulnerable code lines and
generate verifiable repair patches with fewer invocations
and token consumption, reducing the cost of program re-
pair. Thinking-Longer [131] enables small-scale code gener-
ation agents to approach the vulnerability repair capabilities
of larger-scale agents by increasing thinking complexity,
achieving low-resource deployment of automated program
repair systems. AdverIntentAgent [132] avoids overfitting
problems in generated patches by constructing adversarial
test cases for each possible program intention. Nemotron-
CORTEXA [133] adopts diverse repair candidate mecha-
nisms for Python program repair.
5.3
Automated Test Code Generation
With the popularization of code generation technology, the
focus of software development is shifting toward verifica-
tion and testing. Moreover, the testing phase has evolved
into a key aspect for managing and verifying large amounts


13
of generated code. LLM-based code generation agents can
generate unit tests, integration tests, and security test cases
based on requirements, code, and related documentation, as
well as execute automated testing processes [21, 31, 134, 134,
144].
In unit testing, traditional search methods like EvoSuite
[145] typically rely on structural information and code exe-
cution paths, unable to understand function semantics, and
can only attempt to collide with boundaries through exten-
sive coverage or heuristic exploration. In contrast, LLMs
can better understand functional intentions and semantic
boundaries. TestPilot [31] can automatically generate test
cases for JavaScript APIs, achieving 52.8% branch coverage
on 25 npm packages and 1,684 API functions, improving
27% compared to the feedback-driven tool Nessie. CAN-
DOR [32] can generate Java unit test cases end-to-end,
successfully surpassing EvoSuite in metrics such as line
coverage. In integration testing, XUAT-Copilot [20] can au-
tomatically complete the determination of test instruction
types, specific parameter filling, and effect verification. The
system achieves automated integration testing for mobile
payment applications such as WeChat Pay. LogiAgent [21]
integrates components for test scenario generation, API
request execution and verification, and logic notification. It
overcomes the problem that traditional REST API testing
only focuses on detecting server crashes and error codes.
Meanwhile, this system achieves automated detection of
a series of logic problems brought by business develop-
ment and domain-specific requirements. In security testing,
LLM-based code generation agents can automatically derive
aggressive input patterns and boundary condition cases
from natural language documentation, interface definitions,
and code structures. SeedMind [35] automatically generates
high-quality seed inputs through LLMs as starting points for
gray-box fuzzing. The framework can dynamically adjust
generation strategies based on test feedback to improve test
coverage. Meta’s ACH [36] system generates mutants that
conform to program semantics through LLMs and judges
mutant equivalence, improving the efficiency of mutation
testing.
Automated testing processes involve not only test case
generation but also execution, evaluation, and analysis. For
example, AUITestAgent [134] can automatically identify
interactive instructions and execute full-process graphical
user interface operations and functional verification through
pure natural language testing requirements. The HEPH sys-
tem [135] from NVIDIA achieves verification of correctness
of C/C++-based embedded systems in various scenarios by
analyzing requirement documents and retrieving various re-
lated files, and guides the next round of test case generation
with coverage reports after each testing round.
Although the automated testing capabilities of LLM-
based code generation agents have not yet comprehensively
surpassed traditional tools, their semantic understanding
advantages in covering boundaries and discovering hidden
errors deserve future in-depth exploration.
5.4
Automated Code Refactoring and Optimization
Automated code refactoring and optimization help improve
code maintainability and runtime efficiency. LLM-based
agents can understand the semantics of existing code and
combine external tools such as static analysis, test feed-
back, and performance monitoring to decide how to rewrite
code [107, 139].
In structural code refactoring, Baumgartner et al. [22]
propose a modular automated refactoring pipeline based
on LLMs for detecting and repairing data clumps in GitHub
repositories. EM-Assist [137] designs plugins for overly long
functions written by users in Java and Kotlin, using LLMs
to provide extract method suggestions. iSMELL [136] can
automatically invoke multiple professional detection tools
for different types of code smell and integrate tool detection
results into LLMs to generate targeted refactoring sugges-
tions. Siddeeq et al. [138] propose a multi-agent system
for automated Haskell code refactoring, completing tasks
such as variable renaming, function extraction, redundancy
elimination, module reorganization, and style unification.
The system solves the code refactoring difficulties brought
by Haskell’s pure functional characteristics.
In code performance optimization, both LASSI-EE [33]
and SysLLMatic [34] use LLMs to analyze various per-
formance and energy consumption metrics during code
runtime, achieving improvements in software system per-
formance and energy consumption through multi-round
diagnosis and optimization.
5.5
Automated Requirement Clarification
Requirement clarification aims to eliminate ambiguity and
uncertainty in instructions to ensure accurate understanding
of the true intentions from the users. LLM-based code gen-
eration agents can handle ambiguous or incomplete natural
language requirements and gradually clarify them under
user feedback guidance, thereby generating code that meets
final requirements [118, 140].
Existing applications have evolved along a develop-
mental trajectory that progresses from static understanding
of requirements to dynamic dialogue-based clarification.
This path includes the detection of ambiguity, the proac-
tive generation of clarification questions, and ultimately,
the collaborative control of generation processes between
humans and machines. ClarifyGPT [19] judges whether
ambiguous requirements exist by checking the consistency
of multiple generation results from LLMs and obtains accu-
rate requirements through question-and-answer with users.
Furthermore, combining test-driven development concepts,
TiCoder [140] guides users to clarify natural language re-
quirements by automatically generating test cases, thereby
improving code generation accuracy. SpecFix [141] can au-
tomatically guide LLMs to make minimal modifications to
original requirement texts to eliminate unnecessary ambi-
guity. However, due to lack of interaction with the outside
world, overall effectiveness is limited by LLM capabilities.
InterAgent [142] verifies the capabilities of LLM-based code
generation agents in identifying unclear instructions, ac-
tively clarifying, and improving performance through in-
teraction in complex tasks. The framework ultimately finds
that under incomplete requirement conditions, most LLMs
perform poorly without active interaction but can effectively
obtain key information when interactive, approaching per-
formance under complete input conditions. Additionally,


14
HiLDe [143] enables human users to integrate personalized
requirements into key decision positions of code generation
by selecting subsequent code generation results.
6
EVALUATION METHODS AND BENCHMARKS
Evaluating code generation agents, particularly those used
to solve complex software engineering tasks, is a fundamen-
tal and extremely challenging problem. The core challenge
lies in the fact that evaluation methods must go beyond
judging code syntax or pass rates to deeply explore the
problem-solving capabilities of agents in complex, dynamic
software development scenarios. This chapter provides a
structured overview of existing evaluation methods and
benchmarks for code generation agents. These methods
have evolved significantly over time. Initially, they focused
on assessing self-contained code snippets, such as individ-
ual functions. Gradually, however, the focus has shifted
toward evaluating the ability of agents to perform multi-
step, interactive tasks within large and complex software
repositories. This shift reflects the expanding boundaries of
code generation capabilities in the field of software engi-
neering.
6.1
Evaluation Benchmarks
The evaluation of code generation tasks heavily relies
on standardized benchmark datasets. Early benchmarks
mainly focus on basic independent unit code generation
tasks, while newly developed benchmarks in recent years
are committed to simulating real software development
tasks, emphasizing the interaction, planning, and execution
capabilities of agents in complex environments. Existing
evaluation benchmarks mainly include three major cate-
gories: method/class-level, programming contest-level, and
benchmarks oriented toward real software development
scenarios.
Method/Class-level Code Generation Benchmarks: In
the initial phase of research on code generation agents,
evaluation primarily focused on independent and clearly
specified programming tasks. The central aim was to de-
termine whether models could transform natural language
descriptions into syntactically and functionally correct code
snippets. This line of work is typically referred to as method-
level or class-level code generation, in which models receive
high-level functional requirements, optionally accompanied
by method signatures, and are required to generate com-
plete method bodies. The benchmarks constructed during
this period provide methodological foundations for later
research targeting more complex tasks. They also establish
an evaluation framework based on functional correctness,
which has been widely adopted in both academic and
practical settings.
Among
numerous
benchmarks,
HumanEval
[51],
launched by OpenAI in 2021, has milestone significance. It
borrows ideas from online programming platforms (such
as LeetCode), providing unit test cases for each problem.
This benchmark shifts evaluation standards from vague text
similarity to objective, automatable code execution testing.
It establishes a new gold standard for the code generation
field. Similarly, MBPP [146] dataset proposed by Google
Research focuses on entry-level Python programming tasks.
In this benchmark, each problem includes natural language
descriptions, reference answers, and three assertion state-
ments for automatic testing, covering various problem types
from mathematical calculations to basic data processing.
Programming Contest Code Generation Benchmarks:
As the capabilities of LLMs improve, code generation evalu-
ation gradually shifts from simple function implementation
to complex tasks requiring deeper logical reasoning and
algorithmic design, such as programming contest problems.
Such tasks not only require models to master program-
ming language syntax but also test their abilities to analyze
problems, design algorithms, and organize complex logic.
The academic community has constructed several high-
quality programming contest benchmarks. Among them,
APPS [147], CodeContests [9], and LiveCodeBench [148]
are three most representative benchmarks. APPS collects
10,000 problems from online evaluation websites such as
Codeforces and divides them into three difficulty levels.
CodeContests contains 13,328 problems collected from real
programming contests, covering C++, Python, and Java
languages. To avoid data contamination risks [149], Live-
CodeBench continuously maintains new programming con-
test problems from LeetCode, AtCoder, and CodeForces
platforms, updating the dataset every few months. As of
now, it includes 1,055 problems from May 2023 to May 2025.
Evaluation of these benchmarks typically uses test case pass
rates as core metrics.
Benchmarks for Real Software Development Scenar-
ios: With the rapid development of code generation agents,
research focus has shifted toward building autonomous
agents capable of executing complex tasks in real software
projects. A series of benchmarks aimed at simulating real
software engineering scenarios has emerged. A key charac-
teristic of these benchmarks is that they provide a complete
software development environment. In this environment,
agents are required to solve real-world tasks by interacting
with codebases, command-line interfaces, debugging tools,
and other resources, simulating the workflow of human
developers. For example, SWE-Bench [150] is a large-scale
GitHub Issues resolution benchmark containing thousands
of real GitHub Issues. The Issues are collected from 12
popular Python codebases, with task types covering defect
repair and new feature development. Due to the complexity
of the original dataset, researchers have also constructed
two important derivative versions. One is SWE-Bench-Lite,
which screens 300 more self-contained functional defect
repair tasks for faster, more focused evaluation. The other is
SWE-Bench-Verified, where OpenAI researchers manually
verify and screen instances from the original SWE-Bench,
ultimately forming a test set containing 500 high-quality
instances. CodeAgentBench [28] contains 5 real Python
software projects and 101 tasks, requiring models to imple-
ment new functions based on functional documentation and
existing project code. Web-Bench [151] covers multiple web
project development tasks from scratch. This sequential,
project-based approach differs from other benchmarks like
CodeAgentBench and SWE-Bench, focusing on evaluating
the long-term planning, memory, and sustained contex-
tual understanding capabilities of agents across multiple
steps in project development tasks. Aider [152] contains


15
225 high-difficulty educational programming exercises cov-
ering multiple programming languages, requiring models
or agents to implement corresponding functions based on
instruction documentation. Additionally, there are other
real project-oriented code generation benchmarks, such as
EvoCodeBench [153] and DevEval [154], which require
models to generate target code that meets expectations
given complete project contexts and requirements.
6.2
Evaluation Metrics
Code generation agent evaluation mainly includes the fol-
lowing aspects: functional correctness, process efficiency,
and non-functional software quality.
Functional Correctness Metrics: Functional correctness
metrics are the most core dimension for evaluating code
generation capabilities . They are typically measured by
executing generated code and testing whether its output
meets expectations. Pass@k [51] is the most commonly used
metric for calculating functional correctness. For each prob-
lem, the model independently generates k candidate code
samples, and if at least one sample can pass all unit tests, the
problem is considered successfully solved. Pass@k measures
the probability of success at least once in k attempts. To
eliminate sampling bias, the following unbiased estimator
is typically used for calculation:
pass@k = Eproblems
"
1 −
 n−c
k

 n
k

#
where n is the total number of samples generated for a
single problem (n ≥k), and c is the number of correct
samples passing tests. This metric simulates scenarios where
developers might generate multiple alternative solutions
and select one in actual work. Therefore, better reflecting
the practical value of models compared to Pass@1, which
only evaluates single generation.
Evaluation Metrics for Code Generation Agents: In
recent years, researchers have proposed specialized evalua-
tion metrics for code generation agents. These metrics aim to
evaluate agents from multiple dimensions, including output
quality, efficiency, cost, and execution process. Among them,
task success rate [150] is a fundamental metric. It directly
measures whether an agent can solve a given problem. For
example, in SWE-bench, task success is defined as whether
the agent-generated patch passes all relevant test cases.
However, task success rate alone cannot fully reflect the
real-world performance of the agent. Efficiency and cost
must also be taken into account. This includes the API call
cost and token consumption [156] required to complete a
task, which are directly related to economic cost. It also
includes latency from receiving a task to producing a solu-
tion, which affects user experience. In addition, local model
deployment may incur computational resource costs [157].
Besides final outputs, the execution trajectory of the
agent is also an important evaluation target. Trajectory ef-
ficiency reflects how many steps the agent takes to complete
the task. An efficient agent should reach the goal through a
minimal and effective sequence of actions, avoiding redun-
dant operations. Some metrics also evaluate the quality of
intermediate steps, such as tool usage accuracy [150]. This
refers to whether the agent can select the correct tools and
use them with valid parameters.
Other Software Quality Evaluation Metrics: As code
generation agents become more capable, evaluation cri-
teria have gradually expanded to include non-functional
attributes that are essential to software quality, such as
security. Emerging benchmarks, such as SEC-bench [158],
are designed to assess the ability of agents to repair real-
world security vulnerabilities. Comprehensive evaluation
also considers code quality [159], which involves several
aspects. Static analysis tools can be used to measure code
readability and complexity, for example, by calculating cy-
clomatic complexity and lines of code [160]. Maintainability
can be assessed using metrics such as inter-module cou-
pling [160]. In addition, agents that follow good engineering
practices are expected to update related test cases during
development to maintain high test coverage [161].
7
DEPLOYED CODE GENERATION AGENT TOOLS
Several multi-agent code generation tools have been de-
ployed and have produced widespread impact in the cur-
rent market. We roughly categorize them into three types
to show their evolutionary trajectory: 1) Co-pilot: Human-
machine close collaboration, serving as the co-pilot of de-
velopers to assist programmers in coding. 2) Collaborator:
Capable of understanding entire codebase contexts and
engaging in deep interactive collaboration with developers.
3) Autonomous Team: Aimed at automating the entire
development process, where humans play more of a client
or manager role. Currently, emerging code generation agent
tools in the market embody this evolutionary trajectory,
playing roles at different stages of programming assistant,
collaborative partner, and autonomous development team.
Table 1 presents a horizontal comparison of these main-
stream tools.
GitHub Copilot [162]: As an integrated programming
agent, GitHub Copilot has elevated programming assistance
to new heights. Its technical core lies in using Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG) to dynamically construct
contexts and safely execute tasks in cloud-based sandboxes
powered by GitHub Actions. This architecture enables deep
integration into the GitHub ecosystem (such as Issues, PRs),
not only assisting in coding but also automating workflows
from requirements to code commits.
Devin [163]: Devin was first released in early 2024,
promoted as the first AI software engineer. It aims to
fully automate various complex software engineering tasks
by empowering LLM-based agents with the ability to use
terminal tools, code editors, and web browsers, covering
the entire workflow from planning, execution, to debug-
ging and deployment. However, actual use revealed nu-
merous problems with Devin, including low success rates,
frequent loops, and difficult-to-resolve hallucination issues.
This indicates that current code generation agents still face
enormous difficulties when handling various complex edge
cases in real-world software engineering projects.
Cursor [164]: Cursor is an AI-native standalone IDE
and a deep practice of the collaborative partner concept.
Through deep customization of VS Code, it achieves a
local-first agent architecture. Its key technology is persistent


16
TABLE 1: Horizontal Comparison of Code Generation Agent Tools
Tool Name
Core Paradigm
Primary Integration
Method
Context Engine
Best
Application
Scenario
Main Advantages
Known Limitations
GitHub Copilot
Programming Assis-
tant
IDE Extension Plu-
gin
Retrieval
Aug-
mented
Code Completion
Wide adoption, ex-
cels at routine tasks
Requires human su-
pervision, may over-
look global context
Devin
Autonomous Devel-
opment Team
Independent Online
Platform
Sandbox-based
Knowledge Base
End-to-End
Code
Generation
High autonomy, han-
dles full task lifecycle
Low practical relia-
bility,
unpredictable
results,
prone
to
loops
Cursor
Collaborative
Partner
AI-Native IDE
Vector Semantic In-
dexing
Code
Completion,
Code
Development,
Codebase Q&A
Deep
codebase
understanding,
excellent interaction
experience
Weaker autonomous
agent capabilities
Tongyi Lingma
Collaborative
Partner
Enterprise
Platform
Integration
Repository
Knowledge Graph
Code Development
Robust and system-
atic
exploration
of
solution space
More
focused
on
enterprise-level
applications
Claude Code
Autonomous Devel-
opment Team
Command Line In-
terface
Ultra-Long
Context
Window
+
Agent
Search
End-to-End
Code
Generation,
Codebase Q&A
Powerful code agent,
global codebase un-
derstanding
Potentially high cost
vector embedding indexing of codebases, achieving low-
latency global context awareness. This enables its agents
to directly interact with local file systems and terminals,
demonstrating efficient, deep interaction and collaboration
capabilities with developers when handling complex code
refactoring tasks spanning multiple files.
Tongyi Lingma [165]: Tongyi Lingma is a collaborative
partner based on CodeQwen, with its LingmaAgent frame-
work showing a unique technical approach. It constructs
codebase knowledge graphs and innovatively uses Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) for systematic navigation and
fault localization, achieving deep understanding of complex
software repositories. This methodology enables it to per-
form well in advanced collaborative tasks such as multi-file
dependency analysis and automated program repair, rather
than just simple code completion.
Claude Code [166]: Claude Code is a terminal-native
programming agent whose design significantly advances
toward the autonomous development team direction. Its
technical core is using ultra-long context windows of up
to 200K tokens for holistic semantic understanding of entire
codebases. Combined with its hybrid reasoning engine and
extended thinking mode, it can autonomously plan and
execute complex code generation, refactoring, and debug-
ging tasks starting from highly abstract natural language re-
quirements. Therefore, Claude Code is pushing human roles
more toward requirement definition and final supervision.
8
CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
We discuss and summarize the challenges currently faced by
LLM-based code generation agents and future development
directions from five dimensions.
8.1
Limitations of Agent Core Capabilities
Handling
Domain-Specific
Tasks: Current LLM-based
agents exhibit significant limitations when dealing with
tasks requiring deep domain knowledge and complex pro-
fessional reasoning. This problem is particularly promi-
nent when tasks involve domain-specific terminology or
industry standards. Due to the lack of structured domain
knowledge bases and specialized training, agents can easily
produce domain-related understanding biases. Moreover,
they may also experience logical collapse or even gener-
ate hallucinations when handling problems beyond their
knowledge boundaries. To break through this bottleneck,
effective domain knowledge enhancement methods need to
be explored.
Intent Understanding and Context Awareness: Human
instructions often have informal and ambiguous character-
istics. When task objectives themselves are vaguely defined
or depend on implicit contexts, agents without strong intent
understanding capabilities are prone to misunderstandings,
leading to outputs that do not meet expectations. Therefore,
code agent systems need to improve their intent reasoning
and context awareness capabilities. Meanwhile, they need
to introduce interactive clarification mechanisms to ensure
alignment with human goals.
Handling
Large-Scale,
Complex
Codebases
and
Project-Level Dependencies: When processing real projects
containing massive files and complex dependency relation-
ships, existing code generation agents have limited capabil-
ities in long-context modeling, cross-file dependency analy-
sis, and overall software architecture understanding, greatly
limiting their application effectiveness in large projects.
Multimodal Understanding and Generation: Modern
software development is a multimodal process, often in-
volving non-textual information such as UI design sketches,
architecture diagrams, and flowcharts. Current LLM-based
agents cannot fully understand and utilize multimodal in-
formation for code generation, which is particularly critical
in frontend development and user interface implementation
tasks. This is one of the important research directions for the
future.
Context Engineering: In real-world software develop-
ment scenarios, information is often scattered across mul-
tiple files, modules, and documents. Without a systematic
mechanism for constructing and managing context, models
are highly prone to generating inconsistent or even incorrect
code. This issue becomes particularly prominent in multi-
step tasks. Empirical evidence suggests that many failures of
intelligent agents do not stem from the models themselves,
but rather from defects in the ingested context. These defects
can be categorized into four typical problems: context poi-


17
soning (incorrect or hallucinated information contaminates
subsequent reasoning), context distraction (redundant in-
formation overwhelms key signals), context confusion (for-
mat inconsistencies lead to misinterpretation), and context
conflict (contradictory information causes decision-making
errors). Although existing studies have attempted to mit-
igate this challenge through approaches such as retrieval
augmentation and long-term memory modules, there is still
a lack of stable and practical solutions for software develop-
ment. Therefore, context engineering is not merely an exten-
sion of prompt design, but rather a dynamic methodology
whose core objective is to deliver the right information and
tools to the model—at the right time and in the appropriate
format. Only through systematic organization and optimiza-
tion of context can intelligent agents maintain consistency,
reliability, and efficiency when operating in complex tasks
and large-scale systems.
8.2
Robustness and Updatability Challenges of Agent
Systems
Error Cascading Within Agent Systems: In multi-agent
systems, minor deviations from upstream agents (e.g., an
incorrect API call parameter) are used as inputs for down-
stream agents. If subsequent agents fail to identify and
correct this error, they will make further decisions based on
the erroneous information. Such deviations are amplified
level by level along the collaboration chain, forming error
cascading effects that may ultimately lead to systemic failure
of entire tasks. This error cascading effect is an important
factor threatening the reliability of multi-agent systems.
Coordination and Management Complexity in Multi-
Agent Collaboration: As the number of agents in a sys-
tem increases, potential interaction relationships between
them grow exponentially, causing system complexity to rise
sharply. Without efficient coordination mechanisms, collab-
oration among numerous autonomous agents can easily fall
into chaos, causing problems like communication bottle-
necks, responsibility ambiguity and goal drift. Ultimately,
the chaotic collaboration will damage overall system stabil-
ity and task execution efficiency. How to design a robust
collaboration framework to effectively manage large-scale
agent teams is a complex systems engineering challenge.
Agent Knowledge Updates and Continuous Learn-
ing: Software development environments are inherently
dynamic, with new programming language features and
framework versions constantly emerging. However, code-
generation agents trained in a one-off manner possess fixed
knowledge bases, making them unable to keep up with
the latest technologies and inevitably prone to obsolescence.
Thus, agents need the capability to actively and continually
acquire new knowledge. Efficient fine-tuning methods such
as LoRA [167] can incrementally adjust model parameters,
but their effectiveness in learning new knowledge remains
limited and they inevitably suffer from degradation of pre-
viously acquired knowledge. Retrieval-augmented genera-
tion (RAG), on the other hand, relies on external vector
databases for real-time retrieval, yet it requires continu-
ous maintenance of external knowledge stores and lacks
deep integration between retrieved content and the internal
knowledge of the model. Therefore, an effective continual
learning mechanism that can efficiently incorporate new
knowledge into agents while avoiding catastrophic forget-
ting is still missing.
8.3
Challenges of Tool Integration and Deployment for
Agents in Open Environments
Flexibility and Security in Tool Usage: To accomplish
meaningful tasks, agents must be equipped with the ability
to use external tools (e.g., compilers, testing frameworks,
database interfaces). However, providing agents with a pre-
defined and static toolset lacks flexibility and cannot meet
the needs of open and dynamic real-world tasks. Thus,
an important research question is how to enable agents to
move beyond the constraints of static tools, achieving on-
demand and flexible tool discovery and integration, while
simultaneously ensuring the security of tool execution to
prevent potential malicious operations.
High Operational Costs of Agent Systems: Multi-agent
systems enhance problem-solving capabilities through iter-
ative collaboration and interaction, but this often comes at
the expense of significant computational and time costs.
Each interaction among agents and every call to a large
language model incurs substantial overhead. As task com-
plexity increases and interaction rounds grow, the overall
cost escalates sharply, becoming a major economic and
technical barrier to large-scale deployment of multi-agent
systems in real-world development scenarios.
Lightweight Deployment on Edge Devices: Deploying
code-generation agents on edge devices such as smart-
phones and drones can reduce reliance on cloud servers,
better satisfying needs of users for real-time response and
autonomy. However, the limited computational and storage
capacities of such devices pose challenges for lightweight
deployment of agent systems. Future solutions will require
model compression and inference acceleration techniques to
reduce computational and storage overhead while preserv-
ing generation capabilities. Examples include quantization
to lower representation costs of model weights, knowledge
distillation to transfer capabilities from large models to
smaller ones, and inference pruning to shorten inference
length.
8.4
Trustworthiness, Security, and Ethical Risks of
Agent Systems
Reliability and Debuggability of Agent Systems: The
inherent hallucination problem of large language models
makes them prone to generating content that appears plau-
sible but is in fact false, thereby undermining the reliabil-
ity of agent systems. If agent systems cannot consistently
and reliably provide accurate information, they become
extremely dangerous in high-risk scenarios (e.g., critical
infrastructure control). Furthermore, when agent behavior
deviates from expectations, their complex internal decision-
making chains and nondeterministic outputs make debug-
ging and troubleshooting particularly difficult.
Malicious Code Generation: As the capabilities of agent
systems improve, their security risks require greater atten-
tion. On the one hand, users may craft prompts to bypass
model safety mechanisms and induce the generation of
malicious code. On the other hand, agents may memorize


18
and reproduce historical data containing security vulnera-
bilities or attack scripts, thereby automatically generating
malicious code targeting specific systems. To mitigate such
risks, comprehensive security review mechanisms must be
introduced before and after the generation process [168].
Potential measures include conducting interpretability anal-
yses of generation paths to identify risks prior to code
output, and applying sandbox-based detection to sensitive
operations in the generated content afterward.
Code
Copyright
and
Ownership: Code-generation
agents are trained on public code data from open-source
repositories, and may also involve private code data from
enterprises and individuals. Consequently, agents may
generate code segments that closely resemble copyright-
protected code, or reproduce open-source content subject to
licensing restrictions that is then used for commercial pur-
poses—leading to copyright infringement risks. Moreover,
due to the current lack of unified standards for copyright
recognition of agent-generated content, the legal responsi-
bilities associated with using such systems in software de-
velopment remain ambiguous and prone to disputes. Future
research needs to incorporate techniques such as “digital
watermarking” [169] during both training and inference to
trace the origin of generated content, alongside establishing
robust community-level ethical guidelines.
8.5
Evaluation System Completeness and Software
Paradigm Evolution
Inadequate Effectiveness and Comprehensiveness of Eval-
uation Methods: Existing evaluation methods for code gen-
eration systems have clear limitations. They often focus
solely on metrics like test pass rates (e.g., Pass@k), while
overlooking important factors such as human cognitive load
and the effort required for intervention in real collaborative
scenarios. This one-dimensional approach fails to capture
the practical utility of such systems. There is a pressing
need for a more comprehensive evaluation framework that
considers multiple aspects, including: (1) task effectiveness
and efficiency, (2) the quality of human-agent interaction, (3)
system security and interpretability, and (4) user experience
and cognitive demands. Such a framework is essential to
support the development of code generation agents that are
not only effective but also trustworthy and user-friendly in
real-world applications.
Software Paradigm Transformation: The current soft-
ware development paradigm is characterized by a collab-
orative model in which human developers work alongside
code generation agents. In this model, agents function as
advanced productivity tools embedded within the tradi-
tional software engineering workflow. Human developers
remain the central decision-makers, leveraging agents to
assist with tasks such as coding, debugging, and mainte-
nance. The end product continues to be conventional soft-
ware delivered as static artifacts. However, a shift toward
a new paradigm is emerging, where agents no longer serve
merely as supporting tools but take on a more autonomous
role in delivering complete task outcomes. In this future
paradigm, users interact with the system through high-level
intent descriptions rather than low-level code manipulation,
and their role evolves from that of software constructors
to providers of problem statements. The agent system in-
terprets these intents, dynamically generates the necessary
code, executes actions internally, and directly returns results,
effectively offering software as a service on demand. This
transformation imposes new and significant demands on
the autonomy, reliability, and ability of agents to complete
complex tasks in an end-to-end manner.
9
CONCLUSION
This paper investigates code generation with LLM-based
agents as a new paradigm in software development. It high-
lights three key features that set them apart from traditional
code generation methods: autonomy, broader task coverage,
and engineering practicality. We review the development
path of this technology and analyze its core components
from a methodological perspective. At the application level,
we summarize typical use cases across the software de-
velopment lifecycle and list representative tools that have
been deployed. We also discuss current technical challenges,
including integration with development environments and
ensuring code quality, which remain central problems for
future research.
Looking ahead, we are confident that with the gradual
resolution of existing challenges, code generation agents
will fundamentally transform the field of software engineer-
ing. These agents promise to free developers from repetitive
and tedious coding tasks, enabling them to focus more on
creative problem formulation and system-level design. We
sincerely hope that this survey serves as a valuable resource
for peers in the community, sparks further innovative think-
ing, and contributes to the advancement and maturity of this
promising technology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Tianchi Xu and Mengren Zheng for
their contributions to our early work.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Kitzelmann, “Inductive programming: A survey of
program synthesis techniques,” in International Work-
shop on Approaches and Applications of Inductive Pro-
gramming (AAIP), 2009, pp. 50–73.
[2]
W. Ling, E. Grefenstette, K. M. Hermann, T. Koˇcisk`y,
A. Senior, F. Wang, and P. Blunsom, “Latent predictor
networks for code generation,” in Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2016, pp.
599–609.
[3]
P. Yin and G. Neubig, “A syntactic neural model for
general-purpose code generation,” in Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2017,
pp. 440–450.
[4]
H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A.
Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozi`ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro,
F. Azhar et al., “LLaMA: Open and efficient founda-
tion language models,” 2023.
[5]
H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Alma-
hairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava,
S. Bhosale et al., “LLaMA 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models,” 2023.


19
[6]
L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wain-
wright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama,
A. Ray et al., “Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback,” in Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022,
pp. 27 730–27 744.
[7]
B. Roziere, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat,
X. E. Tan, Y. Adi, J. Liu, R. Sauvestre, T. Remez et al.,
“Code LLaMA: Open foundation models for code,”
2023.
[8]
Y. Wang, W. Wang, S. Joty, and S. C. Hoi, “CodeT5:
Identifier-aware unified pre-trained encoder-decoder
models for code understanding and generation,” in
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), 2021, pp. 8696–8708.
[9]
Y. Li, D. Choi, J. Chung, N. Kushman, J. Schrit-
twieser, R. Leblond, T. Eccles, J. Keeling, F. Gimeno,
A. Dal Lago et al., “Competition-level code generation
with Alphacode,” Science, vol. 378, no. 6624, pp. 1092–
1097, 2022.
[10]
X. Jiang, Y. Dong, L. Wang, Z. Fang, Q. Shang, G. Li,
Z. Jin, and W. Jiao, “Self-planning code generation
with large language models,” ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 33, no. 7,
pp. 1–30, 2024.
[11]
H. Le, H. Chen, A. Saha, A. Gokul, D. Sahoo, and
S. Joty, “CodeChain: Towards modular code genera-
tion through chain of self-revisions with representa-
tive sub-modules,” in International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[12]
R. Pan, H. Zhang, and C. Liu, “CodeCoR: An llm-
based self-reflective multi-agent framework for code
generation,” 2025.
[13]
Z. Rasheed, M. Waseem, M. Saari, K. Syst¨a, and
P. Abrahamsson, “Codepori: Large scale model for
autonomous software development by using multi-
agents,” 2024.
[14]
S. Manish, “An autonomous multi-agent llm frame-
work for agile software development,” International
Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development,
vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 892–898, 2024.
[15]
Y. Dong, X. Jiang, Z. Jin, and G. Li, “Self-collaboration
code generation via ChatGPT,” ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 33, no. 7,
pp. 1–38, 2024.
[16]
C. Qian, W. Liu, H. Liu, N. Chen, Y. Dang, J. Li,
C. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Su, X. Cong et al., “Chatdev:
Communicative agents for software development,” in
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), 2023, pp. 15 174–15 186.
[17]
S. Hong, X. Zheng, J. Chen, Y. Cheng, J. Wang,
C. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. K. S. Yau, Z. Lin, L. Zhou
et al., “Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-agent
collaborative framework,” in International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[18]
S. Lu, D. Guo, S. Ren, J. Huang, A. Svyatkovskiy,
A. Blanco, C. Clement, D. Drain, D. Jiang, D. Tang
et al., “CodeXGLUE: A machine learning benchmark
dataset for code understanding and generation,” in
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021.
[19]
F. Mu, L. Shi, S. Wang, Z. Yu, B. Zhang, C. Wang,
S. Liu, and Q. Wang, “ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-
based code generation with intention clarification,”
2023.
[20]
Z. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Li, L. Wang, C. Yi, X. Xu,
L. Cao, H. Su, S. Chen, and J. Zhou, “Xuat-copilot:
Multi-agent collaborative system for automated user
acceptance testing with large language model,” 2024.
[21]
K. Zhang, C. Zhang, C. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Wu,
Z. Xing, Y. Liu, Q. Li, and X. Peng, “Logiagent: Auto-
mated logical testing for rest systems with llm-based
multi-agents,” 2025.
[22]
N. Baumgartner, P. Iyenghar, T. Schoemaker, and
E. Pulverm¨uller, “Ai-driven refactoring: A pipeline for
identifying and correcting data clumps in git reposi-
tories,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 9, p. 1644, 2024.
[23]
M. Rabinovich, M. Stern, and D. Klein, “Abstract
syntax networks for code generation and semantic
parsing,” in Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), 2017, pp. 1139–1149.
[24]
D. Guo, S. Ren, S. Lu, Z. Feng, D. Tang, S. Liu,
L. Zhou, N. Duan, A. Svyatkovskiy, S. Fu et al.,
“GraphCodeBERT: Pre-training code representations
with data flow,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2021.
[25]
D. Guo, S. Lu, N. Duan, Y. Wang, M. Zhou, and
J. Yin, “UniXcoder: Unified cross-modal pre-training
for code representation,” pp. 7212–7225, 2022.
[26]
Y. Hu, Q. Zhou, Q. Chen, X. Li, L. Liu, D. Zhang,
A. Kachroo, T. Oz, and O. Tripp, “Qualityflow: An
agentic workflow for program synthesis controlled by
llm quality checks,” 2025.
[27]
Y. Ishibashi and Y. Nishimura, “Self-organized agents:
A LLM multi-agent framework toward ultra large-
scale code generation and optimization,” 2024.
[28]
K. Zhang, J. Li, G. Li, X. Shi, and Z. Jin, “CodeAgent:
Enhancing code generation with tool-integrated agent
systems for real-world repo-level coding challenges,”
in Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL), 2024.
[29]
R. Wang, X. Han, L. Ji, S. Wang, T. Baldwin, and
H. Li, “Toolgen: Unified tool retrieval and calling
via generation,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2025.
[30]
R. Sapkota, K. I. Roumeliotis, and M. Karkee, “Vibe
coding vs. agentic coding: Fundamentals and practical
implications of agentic AI,” 2025.
[31]
M. Sch¨afer, S. Nadi, A. Eghbali, and F. Tip, “Adaptive
test generation using a large language model,” 2023.
[32]
Q. Xu, G. Wang, L. Briand, and K. Liu, “A multi-agent
llm-based juit test generation with strong oracles,”
2025.
[33]
M. T. Dearing, Y. Tao, X. Wu, Z. Lan, and V. Taylor,
“Leveraging llms to automate energy-aware refactor-
ing of parallel scientific codes,” 2025.
[34]
H. Peng, A. Gupte, R. Hasler, N. J. Eliopoulos, C.-
C. Ho, R. Mantri, L. Deng, K. L¨aufer, G. K. Thiru-
vathukal, and J. C. Davis, “Sysllmatic: Large language
models are software system optimizers,” 2025.
[35]
W. Shi, Y. Zhang, X. Xing, and J. Xu, “Harnessing
large language models for seed generation in greybox


20
fuzzing,” 2024.
[36]
C. Foster, A. Gulati, M. Harman, I. Harper, K. Mao,
J. Ritchey, H. Robert, and S. Sengupta, “Mutation-
guided llm-based test generation at meta,” 2025.
[37]
H. Jin, L. Huang, H. Cai, J. Yan, B. Li, and H. Chen,
“From LLMs to LLM-based agents for software engi-
neering: A survey of current, challenges and future,”
2024.
[38]
J. Liu, K. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Peng, Z. Chen, L. Zhang,
and Y. Lou, “Large language model-based agents for
software engineering: A survey,” 2024.
[39]
J. He, C. Treude, and D. Lo, “Llm-based multi-agent
systems for software engineering: Literature review,
vision, and the road ahead,” ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 34, no. 5,
pp. 1–30, 2025.
[40]
Y. Wang, W. Zhong, Y. Huang, E. Shi, M. Yang, J. Chen,
H. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Wang, and Z. Zheng, “Agents in
software engineering: Survey, landscape, and vision,”
2024.
[41]
A. Svyatkovskiy, S. K. Deng, S. Fu, and N. Sundaresan,
“Intellicode compose: Code generation using trans-
former,” in ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Founda-
tions of Software Engineering, 2020, pp. 1433–1443.
[42]
J. Herrington, Code generation in action.
Manning
Publications Co., 2003.
[43]
B. A. Becker, P. Denny, J. Finnie-Ansley, A. Luxton-
Reilly, J. Prather, and E. A. Santos, “Programming is
hard-or at least it used to be: Educational opportuni-
ties and challenges of AI code generation,” in ACM
Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1
(SIGCSE), 2023, pp. 500–506.
[44]
F. F. Xu, B. Vasilescu, and G. Neubig, “In-IDE code
generation from natural language: Promise and chal-
lenges,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodology (TOSEM), vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1–47, 2022.
[45]
N. Huynh and B. Lin, “Large language models
for code generation: A comprehensive survey of
challenges, techniques, evaluation, and applications,”
2025.
[46]
E. Kasneci, K. Seßler, S. K¨uchemann, M. Bannert,
D. Dementieva, F. Fischer, U. Gasser, G. Groh,
S. G¨unnemann, E. H¨ullermeier et al., “ChatGPT for
good? on opportunities and challenges of large lan-
guage models for education,” Learning and Individual
Differences, vol. 103, p. 102274, 2023.
[47]
Y. Chang, X. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Wu, L. Yang, K. Zhu,
H. Chen, X. Yi, C. Wang, Y. Wang et al., “A survey on
evaluation of large language models,” ACM transac-
tions on intelligent systems and technology, vol. 15, no. 3,
pp. 1–45, 2024.
[48]
W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Hou,
Y. Min, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Dong et al., “A survey
of large language models,” 2023.
[49]
H. Naveed, A. U. Khan, S. Qiu, M. Saqib, S. Anwar,
M. Usman, N. Akhtar, N. Barnes, and A. Mian, “A
comprehensive overview of large language models,”
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology,
2023.
[50]
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit,
L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin,
“Attention is all you need,” in Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
[51]
M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. D. O.
Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda, N. Joseph,
G. Brockman et al., “Evaluating large language models
trained on code,” 2021.
[52]
D. Guo, Q. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Xie, K. Dong, W. Zhang,
G. Chen, X. Bi, Y. Wu, Y. Li et al., “Deepseek-coder:
When the large language model meets programming–
the rise of code intelligence,” 2024.
[53]
B. Hui, J. Yang, Z. Cui, J. Yang, D. Liu, L. Zhang, T. Liu,
J. Zhang, B. Yu, K. Lu et al., “Qwen2. 5-coder technical
report,” 2024.
[54]
J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia,
E. Chi, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou et al., “Chain-of-thought
prompting elicits reasoning in large language mod-
els,” in Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2022, pp. 24 824–24 837.
[55]
E. Wang, F. Cassano, C. Wu, Y. Bai, W. Song, V. Nath,
Z. Han, S. Hendryx, S. Yue, and H. Zhang, “Planning
in natural language improves LLM search for code
generation,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2025.
[56]
R. Nakano, J. Hilton, S. Balaji, J. Wu, L. Ouyang,
C. Kim, C. Hesse, S. Jain, V. Kosaraju, W. Saun-
ders, X. Jiang, K. Cobbe, T. Eloundou, G. Krueger,
K. Button, M. Knight, B. Chess, and J. Schulman,
“WebGPT: Browser-assisted question-answering with
human feedback,” 2022.
[57]
T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dess`ı, R. Raileanu,
M. Lomeli, E. Hambro, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda,
and T. Scialom, “Toolformer: Language models can
teach themselves to use tools,” in Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023, pp.
68 539–68 551.
[58]
L. Gao, A. Madaan, S. Zhou, U. Alon, P. Liu, Y. Yang,
J. Callan, and G. Neubig, “Pal: Program-aided lan-
guage models,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2023.
[59]
J. S. Park, J. O’Brien, C. J. Cai, M. R. Morris, P. Liang,
and M. S. Bernstein, “Generative agents: Interactive
simulacra of human behavior,” in Proceedings of the
36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and
technology, 2023, pp. 1–22.
[60]
N. Mehta, M. Teruel, P. F. Sanz, X. Deng, A. H.
Awadallah, and J. Kiseleva, “Improving grounded
language understanding in a collaborative environ-
ment by interacting with agents through help feed-
back,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10750, 2023.
[61]
Z. Xi, W. Chen, X. Guo, W. He, Y. Ding, B. Hong,
M. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Jin, E. Zhou et al., “The rise
and potential of large language model based agents:
A survey,” Science China Information Sciences, vol. 68,
no. 2, p. 121101, 2025.
[62]
L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang,
Z. Chen, J. Tang, X. Chen, Y. Lin et al., “A survey
on large language model based autonomous agents,”
Frontiers of Computer Science, vol. 18, no. 6, p. 186345,
2024.
[63]
T. Guo, X. Chen, Y. Wang, R. Chang, S. Pei, N. V.


21
Chawla, O. Wiest, and X. Zhang, “Large language
model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and
challenges,” 2024.
[64]
Y. Cheng, C. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Meng, S. Hong,
W. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Yin, J. Zhao et al., “Ex-
ploring large language model based intelligent agents:
Definitions, methods, and prospects,” 2024.
[65]
L. Giray, “Prompt engineering with ChatGPT: a guide
for academic writers,” Annals of biomedical engineering,
vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 2629–2633, 2023.
[66]
J. White, Q. Fu, S. Hays, M. Sandborn, C. Olea,
H. Gilbert, A. Elnashar, J. Spencer-Smith, and D. C.
Schmidt, “A prompt pattern catalog to enhance
prompt engineering with chatgpt,” 2023.
[67]
Y. Gao, Y. Xiong, X. Gao, K. Jia, J. Pan, Y. Bi, Y. Dai,
J. Sun, H. Wang, and H. Wang, “Retrieval-augmented
generation for large language models: A survey,”
2023.
[68]
P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin,
N.
Goyal,
H.
K¨uttler,
M.
Lewis,
W.-t.
Yih,
T. Rockt¨aschel et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation
for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” in Conferecce on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020,
pp. 9459–9474.
[69]
J. Li, C. Tao, J. Li, G. Li, Z. Jin, H. Zhang, Z. Fang,
and F. Liu, “Large language model-aware in-context
learning for code generation,” ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology, 2023.
[70]
J. Wei, J. Wei, Y. Tay, D. Tran, A. Webson, Y. Lu,
X. Chen, H. Liu, D. Huang, D. Zhou et al., “Larger
language models do in-context learning differently,”
2023.
[71]
D. Huang, J. M. Zhang, M. Luck, Q. Bu, Y. Qing,
and H. Cui, “AgentCoder: Multi-agent-based code
generation with iterative testing and optimisation,”
2023.
[72]
H. N. Phan, T. N. Nguyen, P. X. Nguyen, and N. D.
Bui, “HyperAgent: Generalist software engineering
agents to solve coding tasks at scale,” 2024.
[73]
K. Zhang, H. Zhang, G. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and Z. Jin,
“ToolCoder: Teach code generation models to use API
search tools,” 2023.
[74]
H. N. Phan, H. N. Phan, T. N. Nguyen, and N. D. Bui,
“Repohyper: Better context retrieval is all you need
for repository-level code completion,” 2024.
[75]
A. Madaan, N. Tandon, P. Gupta, S. Hallinan, L. Gao,
S. Wiegreffe, U. Alon, N. Dziri, S. Prabhumoye,
Y. Yang et al., “Self-refine: Iterative refinement with
self-feedback,” in Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023, pp. 46 534–46 594.
[76]
K. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Li, G. Li, and Z. Jin, “Self-Edit: Fault-
aware code editor for code generation,” in Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
2023, pp. 769–787.
[77]
X. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Peng,
and H. Ji, “Executable code actions elicit better LLM
agents,” in International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2024.
[78]
T. Huang, Z. Sun, Z. Jin, G. Li, and C. Lyu,
“Knowledge-aware code generation with large lan-
guage models,” in IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Program Comprehension (ICPC), 2024, pp. 52–63.
[79]
I. Gur, H. Furuta, A. Huang, M. Safdari, Y. Matsuo,
D. Eck, and A. Faust, “A real-world webagent with
planning, long context understanding, and program
synthesis,” in International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR), 2024.
[80]
R. Bairi, A. Sonwane, A. Kanade, V. D. C, A. Iyer,
S. Parthasarathy, S. Rajamani, B. Ashok, and S. Shet,
“Codeplan: Repository-level coding using LLMs and
planning,” ACM on Software Engineering, vol. 1, no.
FSE, pp. 675–698, 2024.
[81]
N. Dainese, M. Merler, M. Alakuijala, and P. Martti-
nen, “Generating code world models with large lan-
guage models guided by monte carlo tree search,”
in Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2024, pp. 60 429–60 474.
[82]
J. Li, H. Le, Y. Zhou, C. Xiong, S. Savarese, and D. Sa-
hoo, “Codetree: agent-guided tree search for code
generation with large language models,” in Conference
of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), 2025.
[83]
Z. Ni, Y. Li, N. Yang, D. Shen, P. Lv, and D. Dong,
“Tree-of-Code: A tree-structured exploring frame-
work for end-to-end code generation and execution
in complex task handling,” 2024.
[84]
Y. Han and C. Lyu, “Multi-stage guided code genera-
tion for large language models,” Engineering Applica-
tions of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 139, no. PA, p. 109491,
2025.
[85]
V. Aggarwal, O. Kamal, A. Japesh, Z. Jin, and
B. Sch¨olkopf, “DARS: Dynamic action re-sampling to
enhance coding agent performance by adaptive tree
traversal,” 2025.
[86]
C.-T. Ho, H. Ren, and B. Khailany, “Verilogcoder:
Autonomous Verilog coding agents with graph-based
planning and abstract syntax tree (ast)-based wave-
form tracing tool,” in AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI), vol. 39, no. 1, 2025, pp. 300–307.
[87]
K. Zainullina, A. Golubev, M. Trofimova, S. Polezhaev,
I. Badertdinov, D. Litvintseva, S. Karasik, F. Fisin,
S. Skvortsov, M. Nekrashevich, A. Shevtsov, and
B.
Yangel,
“Guided
search
strategies
in
non-
serializable environments with applications to soft-
ware engineering agents,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2025.
[88]
X. Jiang, Y. Dong, Y. Tao, H. Liu, Z. Jin, W. Jiao,
and G. Li, “ROCODE: Integrating backtracking mech-
anism and program analysis in large language models
for code generation,” in IEEE/ACM International Con-
ference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2025, pp. 670–
670.
[89]
Y. Lu, F. Ye, J. Li, Q. Gao, C. Liu, H. Luo, N. Du, X. Li,
and F. Ren, “CodeTool: Enhancing programmatic tool
invocation of LLMs via process supervision,” 2025.
[90]
T. Gupta, L. Weihs, and A. Kembhavi, “CodeNav:
Beyond tool-use to using real-world codebases with
llm agents,” 2024.
[91]
M. Acharya, Y. Zhang, K. Leach, and Y. Huang, “Op-
timizing code runtime performance through context-
aware retrieval-augmented generation,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC),


22
2025, pp. 1–5.
[92]
M. Athale and V. Vaddina, “Knowledge graph based
repository-level code generation,” in IEEE/ACM Inter-
national Workshop on Large Language Models for Code
(LLM4Code), 2025, pp. 169–176.
[93]
Y. Zhang, X. Zhao, Z. Z. Wang, C. Yang, J. Wei, and
T. Wu, “cAST: Enhancing code retrieval-augmented
generation with structural chunking via abstract syn-
tax tree,” 2025.
[94]
Y. Lai, S. Lee, G. Chen, S. Poddar, M. Hu, D. Z. Pan,
and P. Luo, “AnalogCoder: Analog circuit design via
training-free code generation,” in AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), no. 1, 2025, pp. 379–387.
[95]
T. Chang, S. Chen, G. Fan, and Z. Feng, “A self-
iteration code generation method based on large lan-
guage models,” in International Conference on Parallel
and Distributed Systems (ICPADS), 2023, pp. 275–281.
[96]
X. Chen, M. Lin, N. Sch¨arli, and D. Zhou, “Teaching
large language models to self-debug,” in Meeting Of
The Association For Computational Linguistics (ACL),
2023.
[97]
T. X. Olausson, J. P. Inala, C. Wang, J. Gao, and
A. Solar-Lezama, “Is self-repair a silver bullet for code
generation?” 2024.
[98]
N. Jiang, X. Li, S. Wang, Q. Zhou, S. B. Hossain,
B. Ray, V. Kumar, X. Ma, and A. Deoras, “Ledex:
Training LLMs to better self-debug and explain code,”
in Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2024, pp. 35 517–35 543.
[99]
Z. Rasheed, M. A. Sami, K.-K. Kemell, M. Waseem,
M. Saari, K. Syst¨a, and P. Abrahamsson, “Codepori:
Large-scale system for autonomous software develop-
ment using multi-agent technology,” 2024.
[100] W. Tao, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, H. Zhang, and
Y. Cheng, “Magis: LLM-based multi-agent framework
for github issue resolution,” in Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 37, 2024,
pp. 51 963–51 993.
[101] H. Zhang, W. Cheng, Y. Wu, and W. Hu, “A pair pro-
gramming framework for code generation via multi-
plan exploration and feedback-driven refinement,” in
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Soft-
ware Engineering (ASE), 2024, pp. 1319–1331.
[102] F. Lin, D. J. Kim et al., “Soen-101: Code generation
by emulating software process models using large
language model agents,” in International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE), 2025, pp. 1527–1539.
[103] Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, Z. Yu, and J. Zhao,
“MAGE: A multi-agent engine for automated RTL
code generation,” 2024.
[104] M. A. Islam, M. E. Ali, and M. R. Parvez, “MapCoder:
Multi-agent code generation for competitive problem
solving,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
2024, pp. 4912–4944.
[105] A. Nunez, N. T. Islam, S. K. Jha, and P. Najafirad,
“Autosafecoder: A multi-agent framework for secur-
ing llm code generation through static analysis and
fuzz testing,” 2024.
[106] Y. Hu, Q. Zhou, Q. Chen, X. Li, L. Liu, D. Zhang,
A. Kachroo, T. Oz, and O. Tripp, “QualityFlow: An
agentic workflow for program synthesis controlled by
LLM quality checks,” 2025.
[107] A. Rahman, V. Cvetkovic, K. Reece, A. Walters, Y. Has-
san, A. Tummeti, B. Torres, D. Cooney, M. Ellis, and
D. S. Nikolopoulos, “MACRO: A multi-agent system
for optimizing hpc code generation using large lan-
guage models,” 2025.
[108] S. Liu, J. Fang, H. Zhou, Y. Wang, and Z. Meng, “SEW:
Self-evolving agentic workflows for automated code
generation,” 2025.
[109] Y. Hu, Y. Cai, Y. Du, X. Zhu, X. Liu, Z. Yu, Y. Hou,
S. Tang, and S. Chen, “Self-evolving multi-agent
collaboration networks for software development,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2025.
[110] S. Holt, M. R. Luyten, and M. van der Schaar,
“L2MAC: Large language model automatic computer
for extensive code generation,” 2023.
[111] Y. Li, J. Li, Q. Wang, M. Yang, H. Kong, and
S. Wang, “Cogito, ergo sum: A neurobiologically-
inspired cognition-memory-growth system for code
generation,” 2025.
[112] D. Chen, H. Wang, Y. Huo, Y. Li, and H. Zhang,
“Gamegpt: Multi-agent collaborative framework for
game development,” 2023.
[113] D. Qi, Z. Miao, and J. Wang, “Cleanagent: Automating
data standardization with llm-based agents,” 2024.
[114] Y. Ma, R. Cao, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Liu,
Y. Liu, B. Li, F. Huang, and Y. Li, “Lingma SWE-
GPT: An open development-process-centric language
model for automated software improvement,” 2024.
[115] X. Guo, X. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Li, C. Han, M. Li,
and H. Ji, “Syncmind: Measuring agent out-of-sync
recovery in collaborative software engineering,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
2025.
[116] Q. Xu, G. Wang, L. Briand, and K. Liu, “Hallucination
to consensus: Multi-agent LLMs for end-to-end test
generation with accurate oracles,” 2025.
[117] A. Zhou, K. Yan, M. Shlapentokh-Rothman, H. Wang,
and Y.-X. Wang, “Language agent tree search unifies
reasoning, acting, and planning in language models,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
2024, pp. 62 138–62 160.
[118] D. Jin, Z. Jin, X. Chen, and C. Wang, “MARE: Multi-
agents collaboration framework for requirements en-
gineering,” 2024.
[119] Y. Xu, H. Su, C. Xing, B. Mi, Q. Liu, W. Shi, B. Hui,
F. Zhou, Y. Liu, T. Xie et al., “Lemur: Harmoniz-
ing natural language and code for language agents,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2024.
[120] M. A. Islam, M. E. Ali, and M. R. Parvez, “Codesim:
Multi-agent code generation and problem solving
through simulation-driven planning and debugging,”
in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2025.
[121] D. Zan, A. Yu, W. Liu, D. Chen, B. Shen, W. Li, Y. Yao,
Y. Gong, X. Chen, B. Guan et al., “CodeS: Natural
language to code repository via multi-layer sketch,”
2024.


23
[122] M. H. Nguyen, T. P. Chau, P. X. Nguyen, and N. D.
Bui, “AgileCoder: Dynamic collaborative agents for
software development based on agile methodology,”
in IEEE/ACM International Conference on AI Foundation
Models and Software Engineering (FORGE), 2025, pp.
156–167.
[123] I. Bouzenia, P. Devanbu, and M. Pradel, “Repaira-
gent: An autonomous, llm-based agent for program
repair,” in International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing (ICSE), 2025, pp. 694–694.
[124] Y. Zhang, H. Ruan, Z. Fan, and A. Roychoudhury,
“AutoCodeRover: Autonomous program improve-
ment,” in ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA), 2024, pp. 1592–
1604.
[125] J. Yang, C. E. Jimenez, A. Wettig, K. Lieret, S. Yao,
K. Narasimhan, and O. Press, “Swe-agent: Agent-
computer interfaces enable automated software engi-
neering,” in Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2024, pp. 50 528–50 652.
[126] A. Nunez, N. T. Islam, S. K. Jha, and P. Najafirad,
“Autosafecoder: A multi-agent framework for secur-
ing llm code generation through static analysis and
fuzz testing,” 2024.
[127] A. Antoniades, A. ¨Orwall, K. Zhang, Y. Xie, A. Goyal,
and W. Wang, “Swe-search: Enhancing software
agents with monte carlo tree search and iterative
refinement,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[128] J. Cen, J. Liu, Z. Li, and J. Wang, “SQLFixAgent:
Towards semantic-accurate text-to-SQL parsing via
consistency-enhanced multi-agent collaboration,” in
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), no. 1,
2025, pp. 49–57.
[129] Z. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, M. Yao, K. Ding,
and J. Zhao, “Orcaloca: An llm agent framework for
software issue localization,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2025.
[130] H. Li, Y. Tang, S. Wang, and W. Guo, “Patchpilot: A
stable and cost-efficient agentic patching framework,”
2025.
[131] Y. Ma, Y. Li, Y. Dong, X. Jiang, R. Cao, J. Chen,
F. Huang, and B. Li, “Thinking longer, not larger:
Enhancing software engineering agents via scaling
test-time compute,” 2025.
[132] H. Ye, A. Z. Yang, C. Hu, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, and
C. Le Goues, “Adverintent-agent: Adversarial rea-
soning for repair based on inferred program intent,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, vol. 2,
no. ISSTA, pp. 1398–1420, 2025.
[133] A. Sohrabizadeh, J. Song, M. Liu, R. Roy, C. Lee,
J. Raiman, and B. Catanzaro, “Nemotron-cortexa: En-
hancing llm agents for software engineering tasks
via improved localization and solution diversity,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
2025.
[134] Y. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Guo, C. Chen,
X. Wang, and Y. Zhou, “Auitestagent: Automatic re-
quirements oriented gui function testing,” 2024.
[135] https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/building-ai-
agents-to-automate-software-test-case-creation/.
[136] D. Wu, F. Mu, L. Shi, Z. Guo, K. Liu, W. Zhuang,
Y. Zhong, and L. Zhang, “ismell: Assembling llms
with expert toolsets for code smell detection and refac-
toring,” in IEEE/ACM International Conference on Au-
tomated Software Engineering (ICASE), 2024, pp. 1345–
1357.
[137] D. Pomian, A. Bellur, M. Dilhara, Z. Kurbatova, E. Bo-
gomolov, A. Sokolov, T. Bryksin, and D. Dig, “EM-
Assist: Safe automated extractmethod refactoring with
LLMs,” in Companion Proceedings of the 32nd ACM
International Conference on the Foundations of Software
Engineering, 2024, pp. 582–586.
[138] S. Siddeeq, Z. Rasheed, M. A. Sami, M. Hasan,
M. Waseem, J. Rasku, M. Saari, K.-K. Kemell, and
P. Abrahamsson, “Distributed approach to haskell
based applications refactoring with llms based multi-
agent systems,” 2025.
[139] Z. Jiang, D. Schmidt, D. Srikanth, D. Xu, I. Kaplan,
D. Jacenko, and Y. Wu, “AIDE: AI-driven exploration
in the space of code,” 2025.
[140] S. Fakhoury, A. Naik, G. Sakkas, S. Chakraborty, and
S. K. Lahiri, “LLM-based test-driven interactive code
generation: User study and empirical evaluation,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2024.
[141] H. Jia, R. Morris, H. Ye, F. Sarro, and S. Mechtaev,
“Automated repair of ambiguous natural language
requirements,” 2025.
[142] S. Vijayvargiya, X. Zhou, A. Yerukola, M. Sap, and
G. Neubig, “Interactive agents to overcome ambiguity
in software engineering,” 2025.
[143] E. A. Gonz´alez, R. Rothkopf, S. Lerner, and N. Po-
likarpova, “HILDE: Intentional code generation via
human-in-the-loop decoding,” 2025.
[144] K. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, J. M. Zhang, Y. Han, Y. Ma,
Y. Dong, G. Li, and G. Huang, “Llm-powered test case
generation for detecting bugs in plausible programs,”
2024.
[145] G. Fraser and A. Arcuri, “Evosuite: On the challenges
of test case generation in the real world,” in ICST.
IEEE Computer Society, 2013, pp. 362–369.
[146] J.
Austin,
A.
Odena,
M.
I.
Nye,
M.
Bosma,
H. Michalewski, D. Dohan, E. Jiang, C. J. Cai, M. Terry,
Q. V. Le, and C. Sutton, “Program synthesis with large
language models,” 2021.
[147] D. Hendrycks, S. Basart, S. Kadavath, M. Mazeika,
A. Arora, E. Guo, C. Burns, S. Puranik, H. He, D. Song,
and J. Steinhardt, “Measuring coding challenge com-
petence with APPS,” in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021.
[148] N. Jain, K. Han, A. Gu, W. Li, F. Yan, T. Zhang,
S. Wang, A. Solar-Lezama, K. Sen, and I. Stoica,
“Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination free eval-
uation of large language models for code,” in Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2025.
[149] Y. Dong, X. Jiang, H. Liu, Z. Jin, B. Gu, M. Yang,
and G. Li, “Generalization or memorization: Data
contamination and trustworthy evaluation for large
language models,” in ACL (Findings).
Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2024, pp. 12 039–12 050.
[150] C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei,


24
O. Press, and K. R. Narasimhan, “Swe-bench: Can
language models resolve real-world github issues?”
in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2024.
[151] K. Xu, Y. Mao, X. Guan, and Z. Feng, “Web-bench: A
LLM code benchmark based on web standards and
frameworks,” 2025.
[152] P.
Gauthier,
“Gpt
code
editing
benchmarks,”
https://aider.chat/docs/benchmarks.html#the-
benchmark, 2024, [Accessed 21-01-2025].
[153] J.
Li,
G.
Li,
X.
Zhang,
Y.
Dong,
and
Z.
Jin,
“Evocodebench: An evolving code generation bench-
mark aligned with real-world code repositories,” 2024.
[154] J. Li, G. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Liu, H. Zhu, L. Wang,
K. Liu, Z. Fang, L. Wang, J. Ding, X. Zhang, Y. Zhu,
Y. Dong, Z. Jin, B. Li, F. Huang, and Y. Li, “Deveval:
A manually-annotated code generation benchmark
aligned with real-world code repositories,” 2024.
[155] Y. Dong, J. Ding, X. Jiang, G. Li, Z. Li, and Z. Jin,
“Codescore: Evaluating code generation by learning
code execution,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.,
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 77:1–77:22, 2025.
[156] J. Hu, W. Zheng, Y. Liu, and Y. Liu, “Optimizing token
consumption in llms: A nano surge approach for code
reasoning efficiency,” 2025.
[157] C. Zhao, C. Deng, C. Ruan, D. Dai, H. Gao, J. Li,
L. Zhang, P. Huang, S. Zhou, S. Ma, W. Liang, Y. He,
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, and Y. X. Wei, “Insights into deepseek-
v3: Scaling challenges and reflections on hardware
for ai architectures,” in International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2025, pp. 1731–1745.
[158] H. Lee, Z. Zhang, H. Lu, and L. Zhang, “Sec-bench:
Automated benchmarking of llm agents on real-world
software security tasks,” 2025.
[159] K. Zhang, H. Zhang, G. Li, J. You, J. Li, Y. Zhao,
and Z. Jin, “Sealign: Alignment training for software
engineering agent,” 2025.
[160] S. Siddeeq, M. Waseem, Z. Rasheed, M. M. Hasan,
J. Rasku, M. Saari, H. Terho, K. Makela, K.-K. Kemell,
and P. Abrahamsson, “Llm-based multi-agent system
for intelligent refactoring of haskell code,” 2025.
[161] Z. Chen and L. Jiang, “Evaluating software develop-
ment agents: Patch patterns, code quality, and issue
complexity in real-world github scenarios,” pp. 657–
668, 2025.
[162] https://github.com/copilot.
[163] https://devin.ai.
[164] https://www.cursor.com.
[165] https://lingma.aliyun.com.
[166] https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code.
[167] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li,
S. Wang, L. Wang, and W. Chen, “Lora: Low-rank
adaptation of large language models,” 2021. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685
[168] W. Hua, X. Yang, M. Jin, Z. Li, W. Cheng, R. Tang, and
Y. Zhang, “Trustagent: Towards safe and trustworthy
LLM-based agents,” in Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP, 2024, pp. 10 000–
10 016.
[169] R. Zhang, N. Javidnia, N. Sheybani, and F. Koushan-
far, “Robust and secure code watermarking for large
language models via ML/Crypto codesign,” 2025.