ViReSkill: Vision-Grounded Replanning with Skill Memory for
LLM-Based Planning in Lifelong Robot Learning
Tomoyuki Kagaya*1 Subramanian Lakshmi*2 Anbang Ye*3 Thong Jing Yuan2 Jayashree Karlekar2
Sugiri Pranata2 Natsuki Murakami1 Akira Kinose1 Yang You3
Abstract— Robots trained via Reinforcement Learning (RL)
or Imitation Learning (IL) often adapt slowly to new tasks,
whereas recent Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision-
Language Models (VLMs) promise knowledge-rich planning
from minimal data. Deploying LLMs/VLMs for motion plan-
ning, however, faces two key obstacles: (i) symbolic plans are
rarely grounded in scene geometry and object physics, and (ii)
model outputs can vary for identical prompts, undermining
execution reliability. We propose ViReSkill, a framework that
pairs vision-grounded replanning with a skill memory for
accumulation and reuse. When a failure occurs, the replanner
generates a new action sequence conditioned on the current
scene, tailored to the observed state. On success, the ex-
ecuted plan is stored as a reusable skill and replayed in
future encounters without additional calls to LLMs/VLMs.
This feedback loop enables autonomous continual learning:
each attempt immediately expands the skill set and stabilizes
subsequent executions. We evaluate ViReSkill on simulators
such as LIBERO and RLBench as well as on a physical robot.
Across all settings, it consistently outperforms conventional
baselines in task success rate, demonstrating robust sim-to-real
generalization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Robots are increasingly expected to master diverse tasks
and adapt to dynamic, real-world environments. In such
settings, it is essential that agents expand their capabili-
ties throughout their operational lifetime—that is, perform
lifelong learning. Traditional motion-generation approaches
based on RL and IL typically require numerous demonstra-
tions or extensive trial-and-error, hindering rapid adaptation
to new tasks or unseen conditions. Recent advances in LLMs
and VLMs suggest that robots can leverage large external
knowledge bases to produce plans with minimal task data.
Directly applying these models to motion planning, however,
raises two critical challenges.
First, a grounding difficulty arises because LLMs and
VLMs, while strong in symbolic reasoning, often fail to
respect geometric and physical constraints, making it hard
to produce action plans that are anchored in the actual
environment and the physical properties of target objects.
Second, LLMs’ and VLMs’ outputs can be unstable owing
to hallucination and run-to-run variance, which compromises
the reliability of motion plans, especially in physical robotic
execution.
We address these issues with a two-pronged framework
that couples vision-grounded replanning with skill accu-
*Equal contribution
1Panasonic Connect Co., Ltd., Japan, 2Panasonic R&D Center, Singa-
pore, 3National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Tomoyuki Kagaya <kagaya.tomoyuki@jp.panasonic.com>
mulation and reuse. When a task fails, the robot replans
from current observations to generate a physically plausible
action sequence. When a task succeeds, the executed plan
is stored as a reusable skill in a growing library, enabling
subsequent executions without invoking LLMs or VLMs.
Through this loop, the robot continually enlarges its skill
repertoire and improves online plan quality, thereby adapting
to an expanding set of tasks.
We validate the method on LIBERO [1], RLBench [2],
and a real robotic platform. Our experiments show improved
task success rates over conventional baselines, confirming
both the effectiveness of the approach and its compatibility
with lifelong learning across diverse environments.
This paper makes the following contributions:
• A vision-grounded replanning strategy that enables fail-
ure recovery by generating scene-anchored, feasible
motion plans.
• A skill-memory execution framework that stores suc-
cessful plans for zero-inference reuse, expanding the
skill set over time and improving stability while reduc-
ing LLM/VLM calls.
• An empirical evaluation on LIBERO, RLBench, and a
physical robot, showing substantial gains in task success
rates over a baseline (LIBERO: 45% →78%; RLBench:
47% →82%; real robot: 30% →75%).
II. RELATED WORK
A. LLM/VLM-based Planning and Manipulation
SayCan [3] grounds language plans in executability by
filtering LLM proposals with affordances from RL policies.
VoxPoser [4] converts language into 3D affordance/constraint
maps to produce scene-consistent, zero-shot manipulation.
ReKep [5] encodes relations among task-relevant 3D key-
points as explicit costs and solves a vision-conditioned op-
timization for feasible trajectories. These approaches enable
knowledge-driven planning but stop short of a closed loop
that replans from live observations and systematically reuses
successful executions. ViReSkill differs in that it closes this
loop by combining vision-grounded replanning with direct
reuse of successful plans via skill memory.
B. Replanning and Grounded Feasibility
Methods targeting the plan–execution gap include Reflex-
ion (self-reflection memory for trial-over-trial improvement)
[6], REFLECT (LLM-guided failure analysis and fixes) [7],
DoReMi (LLM constraints with VLM violation detection)
[8], LLM+A (prompted goal-conditioned affordances) [9],
arXiv:2509.24219v1  [cs.RO]  29 Sep 2025


Fig. 1.
Overview of ViReSkill framework. Given a language-specified manipulation task, an LLM proposes a step-level plan for control. If the task has
been solved before, the stored skill is replayed in the Planning phase without additional LLM calls, and the robot executes it. On failure, a VLM diagnoses
the execution by localizing the first failing step in the video and explaining the cause; the LLM then repairs the plan in the Replanning. On success, the
verified plan/code are committed to a task-indexed Skill memory. Alternating between vision-grounded replanning on failure and zero-inference replay on
success grows the skill library, reduces variance and model calls, and improves success rate over time.
and Phoenix (self-reflection mapped to diffusion-policy cor-
rections) [10]. They improve diagnosis and online correction,
yet typically do not unify vision-grounded replanning with
immediate consolidation of successes into reusable skills.
C. Skill Libraries and Lifelong/Continual Learning
RoboCat [11] leverages cross-embodiment experience and
self-generated data for general manipulation; RoboMatrix
[12] composes meta-skills to solve unseen tasks; LRLL [13]
grows a library by distilling successful trajectories. ViReSkill
builds on this line by coupling vision-grounded replanning
(on failure) with skill memory for zero-inference replay (on
success) in one loop, reducing model calls while stabilizing
execution and expanding capabilities over time.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
We introduce the ViReSkill framework to address the
challenge of lifelong skill learning in LLM-based robot ma-
nipulation. In this section, we first provide the problem for-
mulation (§III-A), which outlines the setting and objectives
of our lifelong learning approach. Based on this formulation,
we describe how LLMs are leveraged for task planning (§III-
B), enabling flexible and generalizable behavior composition.
We then show how lifelong learning can be achieved through
our skill-based execution framework (§III-C) and the vision-
conditioned replanning method (§III-D) for recovering from
failure and exploring novel policies.
A. Problem Setup and Overview
We study a lifelong learning problem in which a robot
repeatedly solves manipulation tasks through trial-and-error
and progressively improves its accumulated skills within the
ViReSkill framework. The setup is as follows:
• Tasks: Let Ti be the i-th manipulation task in the
training set, described by a free-form language input
Di. The full training set is {Ti}M
i=1.
• Skill Repertoire: For each task Ti, we define its associ-
ated skill as πi ≡P(Ti), which consists of a high-level
plan and low-level control code. The full repertoire is
denoted by P = {πi}M
i=1.
• Rollout and Success Rate: The executor C (based on
VoxPoser [4]) takes as input a skill πi, task Ti, and
stochastic factors ξ (e.g., object pose variation, non-
deterministic dynamics), and returns a motion trajectory
τ. Each rollout is evaluated by a binary success function
r(τ, Ti) ∈{0, 1}.
The success rate (SR) of skill πi on task Ti over N
independent rollouts is:
SR(πi, Ti) = 1
N
N
X
n=1
r(τ(ξn), Ti) ,
(1)
τ(ξ) = C(πi, Ti, ξ),
(2)
where ξn denotes the stochastic input for the n-th rollout.
Our objective is to update the skill repertoire over itera-
tions so as to maximize the average success rate across all
training tasks:
P∗= arg max
P
1
M
M
X
i=1
SR(πi, Ti).
(3)
Algorithm 1 outlines the training process, while Algorithm


Algorithm 1: Training Stage of The ViReSkill
Framework
Data: Training tasks {T }M
i=1, corresponding task
description {D}M
i=1, LLM-based agent C
Result: Skill memory {Pk}10
k=1 at each iteration.
1 P1 = {P1(Ti) ←null}M
i=1
2 c ←null
// Initialize control code
3 for j ←1 to 2 do
// For each training
round
4
for i ←1 to M do
// For each task
5
iter ←1 + 5 × (j −1)
6
Initialize control code from skill memory if
skill exists
7
Piter(Ti) ←Piter−1(Ti)
8
if Piter(Ti) ̸= null then
9
c ←Piter(Ti)
// reuse skill
10
end
11
else
12
c ←C.planning(Di) // use control
code generated by agent
13
end
14
for k ←1 to 5 do
// For each
training iteration
15
τ ←C.verify(c, Ti)
16
r, O ←r(τ, Ti) // collect rollout
success status and
observations
17
if r ̸= 1 then // replan if failed
18
c ←C.replanning(c, Di, O, Piter)
// replanning with skill
19
end
20
else
21
Piter ←c
// Update skill
memory
22
end
23
iter ←iter + 1
24
end
25
end
26 end
2 details the evaluation procedure.
B. Planning by LLMs
We use LLMs to generate Python code that is executed by
an interpreter to decompose the language instruction Di of
task Ti into subtasks, invoke perception APIs, and generate
robot trajectories τ. Let dj denote the j-th subtask instruction
derived from Di, such that the sequence of subtask in-
structions is (d1, d2, . . . , dn). Our planning pipeline follows
the design from VoxPoser [4], and consists of three steps
involving LLM-based code generation:
Step 1: The Planner is responsible for decomposing
the natural language instruction Di (e.g., “press the light
switch”) into a sequence of structured subtask instructions:
Planner(Di) = (d1, d2, . . . , dn)
(4)
Algorithm 2: Evaluation Stage of The ViReSkill
Framework
Data: Training tasks {T }M
i=1, Skill memory
{Pk}10
k=1 at each iteration, LLM-based agent C
Result: Success rate for each task at each iteration
{success rateij}i=M,j=10
i=1,j=1
1
for i ←1 to M do
// For each task
2
for j ←1 to 10 do
// For each skill
memory (2 rounds 5 iterations per
round) to be evaluated
3
success count ←0
4
for k ←1 to 5 do
// For each
evaluation trial
5
if Pj(Ti) ̸= null then
6
c ←Pj(Ti)
7
τ ←C.verify(c, Ti)
8
r, O ←r(τ, Ti)
// collect
rollout success status
and observations
9
success count ←success count + r
10
end
11
end
12
success rateij ←success count/5
13
end
14 end
Each dj corresponds to an interpretable subtask (e.g., “grasp
the button”, “move to the center of the button”) for task Ti.
Step 2: The Composer takes as input a subtask instruc-
tion dj and constructs a set of Language Model Programs
(LMPs), each responsible for a distinct function such as
object detection, affordance prediction, or motion planning:
Composer(dj) = (LMP1(dj), LMP2(dj), . . . , LMPk(dj))
(5)
Step 3: The Low-Level LMPs returned by the Composer
are executed via the executor C to produce a sub-trajectory
τj:
τj = C(Composer(dj), Ti, ξ)
(6)
We define the overall skill πi as the sequence of all
LMP modules returned by the Composer for each subtask
instruction dj:
πi = (Composer(d1), Composer(d2), . . . , Composer(dn))
(7)
The full robot trajectory τ for task Ti is formed by
concatenating all sub-trajectories:
τ = (τ1, τ2, . . . , τn)
(8)
C. Skill Memory for Lifelong Robot Learning
We implemented the ViReSkill to enable lifelong skill
learning in LLM-based robotic manipulation. The system
maintains a task-specific skill memory comprising both high-
level and low-level control code. This memory is updated
iteratively through replanning upon failure.


Fig. 2.
Overview of the proposed hierarchical video-based reflection mechanism. The textual plan and execution video are segmented into logical chunks
of actions (via “open gripper” as a heuristic). Each chunk is summarized into a high-level natural language description, aligned with the corresponding
video segment, and evaluated by a VLM to localize failures. The VLM then provides explicit failure reasons, which are used together with the original
plan to generate corrections with the LLM.
At the beginning of training, the skill memory is empty,
meaning the robot has no prior successful experiences to
reference. To address this cold start condition, the agent relies
solely on LLM-based planning to generate an initial high-
level and low-level control code from the task description.
Once a trial for task Ti succeeds, the corresponding control
code is used to update the task-specific memory P(Ti). Due
to stochastic variations in rollouts, a skill that has succeeded
once may fail in subsequent trials of the same task, resulting
in a non-saturated success rate and leaving room for iterative
refinement.
A key challenge in policy optimization for robotic manip-
ulation—whether in trainable or agent-based approaches—is
the exploration-exploitation dilemma. To balance exploita-
tion and exploration, we design a training stage that consists
of 10 iterations, organized into 2 rounds of 5 iterations each.
At the start of each round, if a skill exists in memory for
the given task, the LLM-based agent initializes its control
code with the stored version to maximize exploitation. Oth-
erwise, the agent generates a new control code based on the
task description. During the five iterations of a round, the
agent collects success indicators and visual evidence (video
recording of the scene collected by the front camera) from
the environment. If an iteration succeeds, the control code
remains unchanged. Upon failure, the agent explores new
high-level plans through engaging in vision-based replan-
ning—a reflection mechanism that revises the failed high-
level plan given visual evidence (detailed in Section III-D).
Since each round has five iterations, the agent can perform
up to four replanning attempts per round. We observe that
additional replanning beyond four attempts yields negligible
improvement; thus, it is more effective to begin a new round,
reinitializing the control code from the latest successful
version stored in memory.
For evaluating lifelong learning performance, we saved the
skill memory after each iteration and used the saved memory
to compute the average success rate using (1). Specifically,
for each skill iteration, we compute the mean success rate
across five rollouts (N = 5).
D. Vision-Grounded Replanning with Skill Transfer
While LLMs have demonstrated strong planning capabil-
ities, their outputs often overlook physical constraints and
lack grounding in real-world dynamics. To address these
limitations, we adopt a self-learning scheme that combines
current observations with past successful experiences, lever-
aging methods that support retrieval-augmented planning
[14] and vision-based replanning [7]. For replanning, we
retrieve a mixed set of examples based on (9): half selected
by task similarity and half selected by plan-code line-level
similarity between the failed plan and the stored plans in the
skill memory.
Specifically, let D denote the task description, and
{d1, d2, . . . , dn} be the sequence of subtask instructions
generated from D by the planner, as defined in Formula 4.
Each di corresponds to a high-level code line in the failed


plan. For task similarity-based retrieval, we embed the entire
task description D and select top examples based on cosine
similarity with stored tasks D′. For code-level similarity,
each subtask di is embedded and matched to the most similar
past subtask d′
j, and examples are ranked by the average of
these maximum similarities. To ensure relevance, we further
filter the candidates retrieved by task similarity and discard
candidates with task similarity scores below a threshold (e.g.,
0.5). The remaining retrieved examples are then injected into
the code generation or re-planning prompt to facilitate skill
transfer and promote effective exploitation.
R(D) = filter
>0.5
 Top- k
2
(D′)∈P
cos
 emb(D), emb(D′)

∪
Top- k
2
(D′)∈P
1
n
n
X
i=1
max
j
cos
 emb(di), emb(d′
j)

,
(9)
Reflection with visual input presents several challenges,
including the need to reason over long-horizon tasks, the
visual language model’s limited ability to understand com-
plex plan code, and the constraint on the number of visual
frames that can be provided as evidence. To address those
challenges, we introduce a hierarchical video-based reflec-
tion mechanism that localizes and analyzes failures through
chunked video-based reflection as illustrated in Fig. 2.
First, we segment both the high-level plan and the exe-
cution video into logical chunks using a simple heuristic:
splitting at each “open gripper” action. Each chunk is then
summarized separately and concatenated to form a concise
natural language description of the plan, which helps reduce
confusion for the VLM. The VLM compares the summarized
plan with the raw video to identify the first failure chunk.
Once a failed chunk is identified, the VLM analyzes both
the chunked plan code and the corresponding video chunk
to provide a grounded explanation of the failure. To handle
plan-level logical errors [7]—cases where every individual
step is executed correctly, but the overall task fails due
to flawed logic (e.g., grasping a new object without first
releasing the one already held)—the system can explicitly
indicate that all actions were executed successfully, which
triggers plan-level reflection on the high-level plan with a
LLM for checking flawed logic.
Finally, the LLM generates a revised plan based on both
the detected failure reason and the original plan code. Sepa-
rate replanning prompts are used depending on whether the
error is due to an execution failure or a logical error. Inspired
by the DROC system [15], we ground the replanning process
on properties of related objects, for instance, determining a
proper offset and obstacle avoidance strategy based on the
scale of related objects.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Setup: Benchmarks, Real Robot, and Metrics
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed ViReSkill
framework, we conduct extensive experiments across both
simulation and real-world settings. We benchmark ViReSkill
along with several baselines on two robot manipula-
tion benchmarks that operate in simulation environments:
LIBERO and RLBench. We also validate the framework
under a real-world setting using a physical UR5 robotic
platform, thereby demonstrating the transferability of learned
skills from simulation to practice. We select simulation
benchmarks based on three criteria: appropriate task diffi-
culty, widespread adoption in robot manipulation research,
and their representativeness of real-world manipulation sce-
narios.
For baseline setups, we compare ViReSkill with the other
four baseline methods, including VoxPoser [4], and three
replanning methods: Retry, Reflexion [6], and REFLECT [7].
A summary of these baselines is provided below:
• VoxPoser: The base code generation pipeline without
replanning. A single control plan is generated per task
and executed to compute success rate.
• Retry: A naive baseline that regenerates a new control
plan from scratch using the LLM after each failure,
without referencing prior attempts or stored context.
• Reflexion: A vision-based reflection method that ana-
lyzes the final frame of a failed attempt together with
the failed plan to infer the failure reason and propose
a corrective plan. Unlike our ViReSkill framework,
Reflexion does not incorporate hierarchical reflection or
in-context learning from learned skill memory.
• REFLECT: A LLM-based replanning method that hi-
erarchically summarizes multisensory observation, ana-
lyzes failure reasons hierarchically, and generates a new
plan.
We use all four baselines for the LIBERO experiments, while
VoxPoser, Retry, and Reflexion are used for the RLBench
experiments. For the real-robot experiments, we compare
ViReSkill against the VoxPoser baseline.
We use the success rate, the percentage of successful trial
during evaluation, given by (1), as the metric to measure
the life-long learning performance of all baselines across
different benchmarks. For the VoxPoser experiments, since
it does not involve replanning, we calculate the success rate
over 5 trials for each task. For ViReSkill, Retry, Reflexion,
and REFLECT, we calculate the success rate for each train-
ing iterations using the saved memory snapshots. For each
task, if a solution exists in the memory, we perform 5 trials
using the memory to calculate the success rate, otherwise,
the success rate of the task is zero.
B. LIBERO Benchmark Results
LIBERO [1] is a robot manipulation benchmark designed
for evaluating the knowledge transfer in lifelong robot learn-
ing. It groups evaluation tasks into 5 subsets: LIBERO-
Object, LIBERO-Spatial, LIBERO-Goal, LIBERO-10, and
LIBERO-90 with each subset containing tasks of comparable
difficulty. For our experiments, we evaluate on the LIBERO-
Object, LIBERO-Spatial, LIBERO-Goal, and LIBERO-10
subsets, each comprising 10 distinct tasks.
For ViReSkill, Reflexion, and REFLECT, we use visual
observations captured from the front camera of the LIBERO


TABLE I
LAST ITERATION PERFORMANCE COMPARISON FOR LIBERO
BENCHMARK.
Benchmark
VoxPoser
Retry
Reflexion
REFLECT
ViReSkill
Object
0.42
0.46
0.94
0.68
0.94
Spatial
0.52
0.52
0.72
0.78
0.80
Goal
0.54
0.48
0.70
0.70
0.70
10
0.32
0.36
0.46
0.48
0.66
Average
0.45
0.46
0.71
0.66
0.78
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON FOR RLBENCH.
Task
VoxPoser
Retry
Reflexion
ViReSkill
TakeLidOff
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
CloseDrawer
0.40
1.00
0.60
1.00
BasketballInHoop
0.20
0.20
0.40
0.60
BeatTheBuzz
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
PutRubbishInBin
0.60
0.80
0.80
0.80
LampOff
1.00
0.80
0.80
0.60
OpenWineBottle
0.60
1.00
0.80
0.80
PushButton
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
TakeUmbrellaOut
0.80
0.80
1.00
1.00
Average
0.47
0.58
0.78
0.82
simulation environment at a resolution of 256 × 256 pixels.
In ViReSkill, input videos are uniformly downsampled to
30 frames. For REFLECT, RGB-D videos of the same res-
olution are collected to reconstruct dynamic 3D scenes, and
additional “grasped object” states—computed using heuris-
tics—are provided to the REFLECT system.
Across all baselines, we employ GPT-4o-mini as the VLM
for analyzing video or image-based failure cases, and GPT-
4.1-mini as the language model (LLM) for code generation
and replanning.
Table I shows the mean success rate of all baselines at
the last training iteration, averaged over all 10 tasks on each
LIBERO subset. We visualize the change of success rate over
iterations in Fig. 3. Across all benchmarks, our ViReSkill
framework consistently outperforms the baseline methods.
Moreover, ViReSkill demonstrates stable and substantial
performance gains over successive iterations, underscoring
the effectiveness of the proposed visually grounded reflection
mechanism. Notably, while the video-grounded replanning
approach achieves performance comparable to the image-
grounded self-reflection method on relatively simple tasks
(LIBERO-Object, LIBERO-Spatial, LIBERO-Goal), it sig-
nificantly surpasses other methods on the more challenging
LIBERO-10 subset. This subset involves composite tasks
(e.g., placing both the mokapot and the cup on the stove),
which demand reasoning over temporal dependencies. These
results highlight the importance of leveraging temporal ob-
servations for effective replanning in robotic manipulation
tasks, particularly in complex, multi-stage scenarios.
C. RLBench Benchmark Results
Beyond the LIBERO benchmark, we further evaluate
ViReSkill on RLBench, which consists of 100 hand-designed
robotic manipulation tasks in a simulated tabletop environ-
Fig. 3.
Success rate of methods on LIBERO benchmark across iterations.
Top to bottom: LIBERO-Object, LIBERO-Spatial, LIBERO-Goal, LIBERO-
10. The horizontal axis is iterations, the vertical axis is success rate (ranging
from 0 to 1).
ment. For our experiments, we select 9 tasks that cover a
range of difficulties and task types. Visual observations are
obtained from the front camera at a resolution of 128 × 128
pixels, and the experimental setup closely follows the one
used in the LIBERO experiments. Although RLBench offers
multiple instructions for each task, this evaluation used a
single, fixed instruction.
Table II shows the comparison between the ViReSkill
framework and baseline methods. ViReSkill achieved the
highest success rate on RLBench (82%), highlighting the
effectiveness of combining replanning with skill memory.
Compared to static planning in VoxPoser, ViReSkill im-
proves performance through memory-based execution. Un-
like Retry’s blind regeneration, it performs targeted replan-
ning based on failure analysis. Although Reflexion also
benefits from failure-aware replanning, ViReSkill slightly
outperforms it by additionally reusing verified skills. These
trends resemble those on simpler LIBERO subsets, suggest-
ing structural similarities.


TABLE III
A COMPARISON BETWEEN VOXPOSER AND VIRESKILL IN PLANNING THE PLACEMENT OF TWO CUPS ON A TRAY
VoxPoser
ViReSkill
composer("grasp the blue cup")
composer("back to default pose")
composer("move to 5cm on top of the black tray")
composer("open gripper")
composer("back to default pose")
composer("grasp the white cup")
composer("back to default pose")
composer("move to 5cm on top of the black tray")
composer("open gripper")
composer("back to default pose")
composer("grasp the blue cup")
composer("move to 5cm on top of the front-left part of
the black tray")
composer("open gripper")
composer("back to default pose")
composer("grasp the white cup")
composer("move to 5cm on top of the back-right part of
the black tray")
composer("open gripper")
composer("back to default pose")
Fig. 4.
Demonstration of UR5 executing diverse real-world tasks using
ViReSkill
D. Real-robot Evaluation Results
We conducted our experiments on a UR5 robot equipped
with a Robotiq 2F gripper and an Intel RealSense [16]
RGB-D camera. LangSAM [17] was employed for object
segmentation, while GPT-4.1-mini handled vision-language
tasks such as video understanding and plan generation.
Sentence Transformer [18] model was used to retrieve rel-
evant past experiences from the memory constructed from
Libero experiments. We evaluated four representative tasks:
(i) placing an object in a basket, (ii) placing a bowl on a
plate, (iii) placing two cups on a tray, and (iv) placing a
pen in a holder. Examples of these tasks executed on the
UR5 robot are shown in Fig. 4. Each task was executed
five times using both VoxPoser and our proposed method
for comparison. Table IV shows our video-based replanning
method significantly outperforms VoxPoser, achieving a 75%
vs. 30% success rate. Our method detects failed steps—such
as missed grasps or poor object handling—and dynamically
adjusts the plan. For instance, in the task of picking and
placing an object into a basket, failures sometimes arise
during the grasping or placing stages. Our system detects
when the grasp is unsuccessful and adjusts the plan to
improve the grip, resulting in a more reliable manipulation.
Similarly, when dealing with larger objects that cannot be
effectively grasped at their center, the algorithm adapts by
replanning to grasp the object by its edges as shown in Fig. 5,
ensuring the task can still be completed successfully. In
placement tasks like putting cups on a tray, a straightforward
plan might place all cups centrally. However, our approach
TABLE IV
TASK SUCCESS RATES ON THE UR5 ROBOT COMPARING VOXPOSER
AND OUR VIRESKILL METHOD (SUCCESSES OUT OF 5 TRIALS).
Tasks
VoxPoser
ViReSkill
Place juice in basket
2/5
4/5
Place bowl on plate
2/5
4/5
Place both cups on tray
0/5
3/5
Place pen in holder
3/5
4/5
Overall Success Rate
30%
75%
recognizes when such placement is unstable or incorrect,
and modifies the plan to distribute the cups across different
positions on the tray. See Table III for the plans generated
by both methods for this task. Likewise, when placing a pen
in a holder, where orientation is critical but not explicitly
indicated in the initial plan, our method adjusts the orien-
tation to correctly position the pen in the holder. Through
this experience-driven, feedback-informed replanning, our
algorithm achieves a greater level of robustness and adapt-
ability during real-world task execution, complementing the
strong baseline plans generated by VoxPoser with enhanced
flexibility and precision.
E. Ablation Study
An important element of the ViReSkill framework is its
ability to reuse skills from previously solved tasks to support
new or related ones—enabling effective lifelong learning. To
evaluate this, we compare the full ViReSkill against a variant
that disables skill transfer during replanning. The results
(Table V) show that while both methods perform similarly
on simpler LIBERO subsets, ViReSkill significantly outper-
forms the ViReSkill without skill transfer on LIBERO-10
(0.66 vs. 0.50). These results support that skill transfer
is a key driver of lifelong learning in ViReSkill, enabling
generalization and faster adaptation to complex, multi-stage
tasks.
V. CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS
In this work, we proposed ViReSkill, a lifelong learning
framework for robotic manipulation that combines vision-
based replanning with skill accumulation and reuse. Our
approach enables robust and efficient robot control by iden-
tifying and correcting failure cases using visual feedback,


Fig. 5.
Demonstration of Task: Pick up bowl and place it on the plate using ViReSkill on UR5
TABLE V
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH AND WITHOUT SKILL TRANSFER
FOR LIBERO.
ViReSkill w/o skill transfer
ViReSkill
LIBERO-Object
0.94
0.94
LIBERO-Spatial
0.78
0.80
LIBERO-Goal
0.70
0.70
LIBERO-10
0.50
0.66
Average
0.73
0.78
while storing successful plans as reusable skills to mini-
mize reliance on model inference. Experiments on LIBERO,
RLBench, and a physical UR5 robot demonstrated that
ViReSkill outperforms existing baselines in both success rate
and adaptability, confirming its practical potential in real-
world environments.
Although ViReSkill supports replanning, its current exe-
cution remains open-loop with respect to perception: once
a trajectory is generated, it is followed without real-time
sensory feedback. While the system can replan between exe-
cutions, it does not respond to observations during execution.
We plan to extend the framework to closed-loop control by
introducing Visual-Language Actions (VLA) as skills that
generate actions dynamically based on image inputs at each
timestep. Moreover, as the skill memory expands, retrieval
cost and management efficiency may become bottlenecks.
To address this, scalable skill management techniques such
as skill merging, compression, and fast retrieval mechanisms
will be essential.
By tackling these challenges, we aim to develop ViReSkill
into a more general and sustainable learning framework that
can adapt across diverse environments and robotic platforms.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Gao, Y. Feng, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu, and P. Stone, “Libero:
Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning,” 2023.
[2] S. James, Z. Ma, D. R. Arrojo, and A. J. Davison, “Rlbench: The
robot learning benchmark and learning environment,” 2019.
[3] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, B. David,
C. Finn, C. Fu, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman, A. Herzog, D. Ho,
J. Hsu, J. Ibarz, B. Ichter, A. Irpan, E. Jang, R. J. Ruano, K. Jeffrey,
S. Jesmonth, N. J. Joshi, R. Julian, D. Kalashnikov, Y. Kuang, K.-H.
Lee, S. Levine, Y. Lu, L. Luu, C. Parada, P. Pastor, J. Quiambao,
K. Rao, J. Rettinghouse, D. Reyes, P. Sermanet, N. Sievers, C. Tan,
A. Toshev, V. Vanhoucke, F. Xia, T. Xiao, P. Xu, S. Xu, M. Yan, and
A. Zeng, “Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic
affordances,” 2022.
[4] W. Huang, C. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wu, and L. Fei-Fei, “Voxposer:
Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language
models,” 2023.
[5] W. Huang, C. Wang, Y. Li, R. Zhang, and L. Fei-Fei, “Rekep:
Spatio-temporal reasoning of relational keypoint constraints for robotic
manipulation,” 2024.
[6] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, E. Berman, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan,
and S. Yao, “Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning,” 2023.
[7] Z. Liu, A. Bahety, and S. Song, “Reflect: Summarizing robot experi-
ences for failure explanation and correction,” 2023.
[8] Y. Guo, Y.-J. Wang, L. Zha, and J. Chen, “Doremi: Grounding
language model by detecting and recovering from plan-execution
misalignment,” 2024.
[9] G. Cheng, C. Zhang, W. Cai, L. Zhao, C. Sun, and J. Bian, “Empow-
ering large language models on robotic manipulation with affordance
prompting,” 2024.
[10] W. Xia, R. Feng, D. Wang, and D. Hu, “Phoenix: A motion-based
self-reflection framework for fine-grained robotic action correction,”
2025.
[11] K. Bousmalis, G. Vezzani, D. Rao, C. Devin, A. X. Lee, M. Bauza,
T. Davchev, Y. Zhou, A. Gupta, A. Raju, A. Laurens, C. Fantacci,
V. Dalibard, M. Zambelli, M. Martins, R. Pevceviciute, M. Blokzijl,
M. Denil, N. Batchelor, T. Lampe, E. Parisotto, K. ˙Zołna, S. Reed,
S. G. Colmenarejo, J. Scholz, A. Abdolmaleki, O. Groth, J.-B. Regli,
O. Sushkov, T. Roth¨orl, J. E. Chen, Y. Aytar, D. Barker, J. Ortiz,
M. Riedmiller, J. T. Springenberg, R. Hadsell, F. Nori, and N. Heess,
“Robocat: A self-improving generalist agent for robotic manipulation,”
2023.
[12] W. Mao, W. Zhong, Z. Jiang, D. Fang, Z. Zhang, Z. Lan, H. Li,
F. Jia, T. Wang, H. Fan, and O. Yoshie, “Robomatrix: A skill-centric
hierarchical framework for scalable robot task planning and execution
in open-world,” 2025.
[13] G. Tziafas and H. Kasaei, “Lifelong robot library learning: Bootstrap-
ping composable and generalizable skills for embodied control with
language models,” 2024.
[14] T. Kagaya, T. J. Yuan, Y. Lou, J. Karlekar, S. Pranata, A. Kinose,
K. Oguri, F. Wick, and Y. You, “Rap: Retrieval-augmented planning
with contextual memory for multimodal llm agents,” 2024.
[15] L. Zha, Y. Cui, L.-H. Lin, M. Kwon, M. G. Arenas, A. Zeng, F. Xia,
and D. Sadigh, “Distilling and retrieving generalizable knowledge for
robot manipulation via language corrections,” in 2024 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 15172–
15179, 2024.
[16] Intel RealSense, “Intel realsense depth camera d400 series (rgb-d
sensors).” https://www.intelrealsense.com/, 2020.
Ac-
cessed: 2025-09-10.
[17] L. Medeiros, “lang-segment-anything: Language segment-anything
(sam
with
text
prompt).”
https://github.com/
luca-medeiros/lang-segment-anything,
Aug.
2025.
GitHub repository, accessed 2025-09-10.
[18] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings
using Siamese BERT-Networks,” in arXiv, 2019.