Preprint
BOAD: DISCOVERING HIERARCHICAL SOFTWARE EN-
GINEERING AGENTS VIA BANDIT OPTIMIZATION
Iris Xu1∗, Guangtao Zeng3, Zexue He4, Charles Jin3, Aldo Pareja3, Dan Gutfreund2,
Chuang Gan2,5, Zhang-Wei Hong2
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) have shown strong reasoning and coding capa-
bilities, yet they struggle to generalize to real-world software engineering (SWE)
problems that are long-horizon and out-of-distribution. Existing systems often
rely on a single agent to handle the entire workflow—interpreting issues, navigat-
ing large codebases, and implementing fixes—within one reasoning chain. Such
monolithic designs force the model to retain irrelevant context, leading to spu-
rious correlations and poor generalization. Motivated by how human engineers
decompose complex problems, we propose structuring SWE agents as orchestra-
tors coordinating specialized sub-agents for sub-tasks such as localization, editing,
and validation. The challenge lies in discovering effective hierarchies automati-
cally: as the number of sub-agents grows, the search space becomes combinatorial,
and it is difficult to attribute credit to individual sub-agents within a team. We
address these challenges by formulating hierarchy discovery as a multi-armed
bandit (MAB) problem, where each arm represents a candidate sub-agent and
the reward measures its helpfulness when collaborating with others. This frame-
work, termed Bandit Optimization for Agent Design (BOAD), enables efficient
exploration of sub-agent designs under limited evaluation budgets. On SWE-bench-
Verified, BOAD outperforms single-agent and manually designed multi-agent
systems. On SWE-bench-Live, featuring more recent and out-of-distribution is-
sues, our 36B system ranks second on the leaderboard at the time of evaluation,
surpassing larger models such as GPT-4 and Claude. These results demonstrate
that automatically discovered hierarchical multi-agent systems significantly im-
prove generalization on challenging long-horizon SWE tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/iamxjy/BOAD-SWE-Agent.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable progress in natural language processing
[38] and reasoning [21], and are increasingly adopted in solving complex coding problems [58].
Yet solving real-world software engineering (SWE) problems remains challenging [25] for LLMs,
particularly for issues that fall outside the training distribution [54]. Despite strong results on SWE-
bench-Verified [25], state-of-the-art systems struggle on more recent and out-of-distribution issues in
SWE-bench-Live [54].
We hypothesize that one reason current SWE agents generalize poorly is their reliance on a single
agent to solve a problem within a single reasoning chain. Solving a software engineering task requires
handling multiple sub-tasks—such as locating relevant files, editing code, and running tests—each
of which depends only on a subset of information. For example, during code editing, the model
only needs to know which line to modify, not how that file was previously located. Retaining such
irrelevant context introduces spurious correlations [57; 36], leading models trained on long reasoning
chains to overfit to training distributions and degrade on out-of-distribution problems.
Motivated by the need to limit irrelevant context during long reasoning processes, we introduce
explicit hierarchical structure to LLM-based agents. This design choice mirrors how human engineers
∗Correspondence: irisxu@mit.edu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology1, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab2,
Independent researcher3, Stanford4, UMass Amherst5
1
arXiv:2512.23631v2  [cs.LG]  1 Jan 2026


Preprint
solve complex problems—cognitive science studies show that humans reduce cognitive load by
decomposing complex tasks into manageable sub-tasks and integrating their outcomes to form
the final solution [32; 37; 33]. Recent work [55] demonstrates that decomposing a complex task
into smaller sub-tasks improves LLM performance. In software engineering, such decomposition
commonly maps to stages like bug reproduction, fault localization, code modification, and validation
[45; 24; 31].
This same idea appears as temporal abstraction in hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) [11]:
instead of solving problems step by step, the agent delegates control to reusable sub-agents, each
defined as a policy for a specific sub-task [40]. An orchestrator coordinates these sub-agents by
selecting which one to activate, and each sub-agent runs until it completes its sub-task [40; 19; 10].
Planning at the level of sub-agents shortens the effective decision horizon and abstracts away low-
level details, allowing the orchestrator to focus on high-level structure. This abstraction supports
generalization because sub-agents capture task-invariant skills—such as repo navigation, information
retrieval, or code modification—that can be recomposed across different tasks and contexts, rather
than overfitting to task-specific action sequences.
Although hierarchical multi-agent systems for SWE tasks appear promising, prior attempts have
achieved only limited success. Existing approaches [8; 34; 14] typically rely on manually constructed
systems, where sub-agents are assigned to predefined sub-tasks (e.g., locating faulty files) and
coordinated by a human-designed orchestrator. These designs depend heavily on human intuition to
decompose tasks and assign agent roles, but such decompositions often fail to align with how LLM-
based agents actually reason and behave. Because LLM behavior is difficult to predict, workflows
that appear logical to humans can perform poorly in practice (Section 5).
This motivates automating multi-agent design, which removes the need for manual specification and
enables the discovery of effective agent designs that may not be obvious to human designers. While
prior work has explored optimizing the design of single-agent SWE systems [51], these methods do
not address the additional challenges of multi-agent coordination, where agents must interact and
share information dynamically. Other approaches optimize fixed, multi-step workflows involving
multiple LLM calls [26; 52; 23], but they still rely on predefined pipelines. In contrast, SWE agents
operate in open-ended environments where execution order and interactions are not fixed in advance.
Automating multi-agent design introduces two main challenges. First, as the number of sub-agents
grows, the design space expands combinatorially, and evaluating each multi-agent design on SWE
tasks is far slower than on simpler reasoning benchmarks like multi-hop QA [23]. Second, the
evaluation signal is coarse and noisy—success or failure of the multi-agent system reveals little about
each sub-agent’s contribution. A team of sub-agents may succeed even if one sub-agent consistently
makes mistakes and others compensate, making it difficult to assign credit accurately.
To address these challenges, we take a bottom-up approach: rather than exhaustively searching over
all combinations of sub-agents, we first identify promising sub-agents individually and then compose
them into a team. This makes the search space grow linearly instead of exponentially with the number
of sub-agents. The key difficulty is credit assignment—a sub-agent’s value cannot be measured
in isolation since it must collaborate with others to solve an issue (e.g., a localizer alone cannot
edit code). Instead of judging success by whether the entire team solves a problem, we estimate
each sub-agent’s helpfulness, measuring how much it contributes to solving the problem when in
combination with other sub-agents. We use LLM-as-a-judge [29] to assess this contribution from the
agent’s behavior during the problem-solving trajectory, yielding a more informative signal than a
binary success or failure outcome.
Once helpfulness is defined, the next question is how to efficiently discover effective sub-agents.
Evaluating a sub-agent once is insufficient because its performance depends on its teammates and
the task instance, both of which vary stochastically. Yet repeatedly testing all sub-agents would be
prohibitively expensive. To balance exploration (trying under-tested sub-agents) and exploitation
(focusing on those that have performed well), we formulate multi-agent design as a multi-armed
bandit (MAB) problem [17; 1; 20; 50], where each arm corresponds to a sub-agent and the reward is
its helpfulness. Well-established exploration algorithms in multi-armed bandits (MAB) [28] provide
an effective toolkit for adaptively selecting sub-agents to evaluate and efficiently discovering a set of
helpful ones. We refer to this framework as Bandit Optimization for Agent Design (BOAD).
2


Preprint
We evaluate our BOAD on SWE-bench-Verified [25], a benchmark for software engineering tasks
grounded in real GitHub issues. On SWE-bench-Verified, our method consistently outperforms
single-agent systems and manually designed multi-agent systems. On SWE-bench-Live [30], which
includes more recently collected issues and presents out-of-distribution challenges, our system ranked
second on the leaderboard at the time of evaluation using a 36B model—outperforming larger-
scale systems based on Claude and GPT-4. To our best knowledge, our work is the first to show
generalization improvements using automatically discovered hierarchical multi-agent systems on
challenging long-horizon interactive tasks like SWE-bench.
2
RELATED WORKS
Prior works [8; 34; 14] built multi-agent systems for SWE tasks by manually designing the prompts
of each sub-agent and the orchestrator that coordinates them. Each sub-agent handled a specific
sub-task (e.g., issue localization). While intuitive, these systems required heavy engineering and
yielded only marginal gains, leading to limited follow-up work in this direction. Other efforts [30; 53]
leveraged diversity across multiple agents or models to improve accuracy through ensembling, where
each agent generated a patch and an aggregator selected the final solution. In contrast, we aim to
automatically learn a hierarchical multi-agent system—comprising an orchestrator and multiple
sub-agents—without manually defining their roles or coordination.
Automating multi-agent design is closely related to prior work on optimizing single-agent systems.
Existing approaches have focused on improving an agent’s prompt [26; 2; 22] or its scaffold [51],
including both tools and prompts, by iteratively refining these components based on task performance.
These methods typically optimize a single agent for a given task. In contrast, we study the automated
design of multi-agent systems, where different agents are specialized for distinct sub-tasks and must
coordinate to solve the overall problem.
Closer to multi-agent systems, several prior works study how to optimize the workflow among agents.
In these approaches, a workflow may be represented as a Python function that orchestrates multiple
LLM calls Hu et al. [23], or as a graph of agents with distinct roles and prompts [52; 56]. While
effective in their respective settings, such workflow optimization methods have seen limited adoption
in SWE tasks. One likely reason is that SWE tasks often demand fine-grained, dynamic coordination
that evolves as the task unfolds. In contrast to workflows that are largely specified prior to execution,
multi-agent systems for SWE typically require agents to adapt and coordinate on the fly in response
to intermediate outcomes and newly discovered information.
Prior work has explored automatically generating multi-agent systems [16; 15; 49], but these ap-
proaches typically assume a fixed execution scheme, such as a predefined agent ordering [16; 15] or
parallel aggregation of agent outputs [49]. In contrast, our work focuses on optimizing how agents
coordinate with one another. In addition, existing studies primarily consider simple, inexpensive
tasks, whereas we target SWE tasks that involve long-horizon, multi-turn interactions and are costly
to evaluate, motivating the need for higher sample efficiency.
3
PRELIMINARIES
Software engineering agents
We study the problem of using LLMs to resolve real-world GitHub
issues, where each issue consists of a textual description and a corresponding code repository. Since
issues are not self-contained, solving them requires identifying and modifying relevant parts of the
codebase. In this work, we focus exclusively on agentic methods [48], where an LLM interacts with
a runtime environment through tool use. Such agents can browse files, execute shell commands, run
tests, and edit code directly, giving them the flexibility to tackle long-horizon tasks end-to-end.
Markov Decision Process (MDP)
We model agent–environment interaction as a finite-horizon
Markov decision process (MDP) [35], M = (S, A, r, H). At each step t, the agent observes
a state st ∈S, consisting of the issue description x and the history of prior tool interactions
ht−1 = (a1, o1, . . . , at−1, ot−1). The agent samples an action at ∈A from its policy π(at | st),
where A includes all available tools and commands. Executing at yields an observation ot ∈O (e.g.,
logs, diffs, or test results), updating the state to st+1. A trajectory τ = (s0, a0, . . . , sT , y) terminates
at T ≤H when the agent submits a patch y (forced at T = H if none is submitted earlier). Rewards
3


Preprint
are sparse:
r(st, at) = 0 for t < T,
r(sT , aT ) =
1
if y passes all tests,
0
otherwise.
The agent’s goal is to maximize the expected rewards J(π) = Eτ∼π[r(sT , aT )]. With sparse rewards
and long horizons, discovering successful trajectories is challenging.
Temporal Abstraction via Semi-MDP (SMDP)
The Semi-Markov Decision Process (SMDP)
framework [39] is widely used to mitigate long-horizon sparse reward problems. Instead of issuing
primitive actions at ∈A, the orchestrator selects a temporally extended action (option) ωt ∈Ω.
Each option corresponds to a sub-agent that executes a sequence of actions (at, . . . , at+m−1) until
termination, after which control returns at st+m, where m denotes the duration of a sub-agent. This
reduces decision frequency and simplifies planning.
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB)
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) [28] is a special case of an MDP with a
single state and no transitions. At each round t, the learner selects an arm at ∈A, receives a stochastic
reward rt ∈[0, 1] drawn from an unknown distribution, and seeks to maximize the cumulative reward
PB
t=1 rt over a fixed interaction budget B. The MAB framework captures decision-making under
uncertainty when only a limited number of trials are available.
4
METHOD: BANDIT OPTIMIZATION FOR AGENT DESIGN (BOAD)
Our goal is to automatically discover a set of K sub-agents Ω= {ω1, . . . , ωK} together with an
orchestrator π that maximizes expected task performance (i.e., reward) r. A straightforward approach
is to directly optimize over both components using evolutionary [13] or random search [12]:
max
π,ΩEx∼Ddesign,τ∼π [r(sT , aT )] ,
(1)
where Ddesign denotes a design set of representative problem instances. However, evaluating a
candidate pair (π, Ω) requires executing full interaction trajectories τ and repeatedly querying the
reward function r. In software engineering (SWE) tasks, such evaluations are long-horizon, multi-turn,
and computationally expensive, making naive joint search over (π, Ω) impractical.
Agent design as a multi-armed bandit. To address this challenge, we reformulate agent discovery
as a multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem [28]. In this formulation, each arm corresponds to a can-
didate sub-agent ωi, and at each round t, a subset of K sub-agents is selected and evaluated under
an orchestrator. Casting agent design as a bandit problem allows us to leverage principled explo-
ration–exploitation strategies [27; 9]: these algorithms can allocate more evaluations to promising
sub-agents while still exploring alternatives. This substantially reduces wasted computation on poor
designs and makes automatic discovery of multi-agent systems feasible under the high evaluation
costs characteristic of SWE tasks. We present the formal bandit formulation in Section 4.1. Towards
this end, we must solve the following problems:
1. The space of possible orchestrators and sub-agent sets is vast and initially unknown, making it
infeasible to pre-enumerate arms, as required by standard bandit algorithms.
2. Even if we evaluate a sub-agent along with an orchestrator and the other sub-agents, credit
assignment is ambiguous: some sub-agents may succeed only by “free-riding” on others, so the
observed reward does not necessarily reflect their individual contribution.
Next, we illustrate how we tackle these challenges in the following sections.
4.1
AGENT DESIGN AS A MULTI-ARMED BANDIT PROBLEM
The space of orchestrator–subagent pairs (π, Ω) is vast and infeasible to enumerate. To make the
search tractable, we maintain an archive Γ of candidate sub-agents. Instead of treating each subset
of sub-agents Ωas an arm, we treat each sub-agent ω ∈Γ as an arm, enabling information sharing
across different sub-agents (will be explained below). At each round t, the algorithm selects a subset
Ωt ⊆Γ by choosing K arms, instantiates an orchestrator πt for Ωt, evaluates (πt, Ωt) on example
4


Preprint
problems from a design set, and propagates feedback to all participating sub-agents. Feedback
is calculated for each sub-agent independently to tackle the credit assignment problem (details in
4.2). Because sub-agents appear in multiple subsets, each evaluation, even if unsuccessful, provides
signal for multiple subsets at the same time. This formulation supports efficient credit assignment,
reduces redundant exploration, and progressively refines estimates uω for each ω ∈Γ. Algorithm 1
summarizes the procedure, with further details provided below.
Bootstrapping a sub-agent archive
We begin with an initial archive Γ0 of candidate sub-agents.
This archive is generated by prompting an LLM with the template in Appendix A.1.2. However,
simply generating sub-agents is insufficient because the orchestrator may not know how to invoke
them. We present sub-agents as tools to the orchestrator and adopt the standard tool-calling protocol
from SWE-agent [48]. To call a sub-agent, the orchestrator must parse its docstring to understand
the functionality and supply the required inputs. For example, an issue-localizer sub-agent requires
the issue summary as input; without it, the sub-agent cannot operate. To ensure this, we introduce
a warm-up stage that rewrites each generated sub-agent’s docstring into a precise specification of
its inputs and outputs, enabling the orchestrator to integrate it correctly. Details are provided in
Appendix A.1.1.
Sub-agent evaluation
At each round t, we select a set of K sub-agents Ωt = {ω1, . . . , ωK} ⊆
Γt−1. Given this set, an orchestrator πt is instantiated by prompting an LLM (see Appendix A.1.3),
and the system (πt, Ωt) is evaluated on a subset of example problems from a design set. This
evaluation yields a performance score uω ∈[0, 1] for each sub-agent ω ∈Ωt. A straightforward
choice for uω is the success rate of the system on the design set, but as discussed in Section 4.2, this
metric is suboptimal and we propose a more effective alternative.
Balancing exploration and exploitation on sub-agent selection
After bootstrapping the archive,
the next challenge is deciding which sub-agents to evaluate in each round. To balance exploration
with exploitation, we adopt the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) [28] strategy. For each sub-agent
ω ∈Γt−1, we track its empirical mean ˆµω(t) of the performance score of uω and selection count
nω(t) up to round t. The UCB score of a sub-agent ω at round t is defined as
UCBω(t) = ˆµω(t) +
s
2 ln t
nω(t).
The first term favors sub-agents with high observed performance, while the second term gives an
optimism bonus to under-sampled sub-agents (i.e., exploration). At each round t, we select the
top-K sub-agents based on their UCB scores, ensuring that evaluations increasingly focus on strong
candidates while still allocating time to uncertain ones.
Expanding the archive
A fixed archive risks stagnation: once UCB identifies a few strong sub-
agents, it will repeatedly exploit them, leaving little opportunity to discover new behaviors. To
address this, we expand the archive dynamically using a Chinese Restaurant Process (CRP) [3; 44].
At each round t, we prompt the LLM to generate a new sub-agent distinct from those in the current
archive Γt−1 (see Appendix A.1.2). The probability of introducing a new sub-agent is
Pr(new at t) =
θ
θ + |Γt−1|,
where θ > 0 is a concentration parameter. This mechanism ensures diversity: when the archive is
small, new sub-agents are frequently added; as the archive grows, the probability decreases, shifting
the emphasis toward reuse of existing ones. Over time, the expected number of distinct sub-agents
after T rounds grows as O(θ log T), providing unbounded but controlled expansion. We also run the
warmup stage (Appendix A.1.1) to ensure the sub-agent is usable by the orchestrator.
4.2
HINDSIGHT CREDIT ASSIGNMENT
A central challenge in our framework is defining the performance score uω of individual sub-agents
ω. A simple approach is to set the score of a sub-agent to the success rate of all trajectories that
5


Preprint
Algorithm 1 Bandit Optimization for Agent Design (BOAD)
Require: budget B, number of sub-agents to select K, concentration θ
1: Initialize archive Γ0 ←BOOTSTRAP.
2: for t = 1, 2, . . . , B do
3:
With probability
θ
θ+|Γt−1|, create a new sub-agent ωnew and set Γt ←Γt−1 ∪{ωnew};
otherwise set Γt ←Γt−1.
4:
for each ω ∈Γt do
5:
if nω(t −1) = 0 then
6:
UCBω(t) ←+∞
▷force initial exploration
7:
else
8:
UCBω(t) ←ˆµω(t −1) +
q
2 ln t
nω(t−1)
9:
end if
10:
end for
11:
Select top-K sub-agents based on UCB scores as a set of sub-agents Ωt.
12:
Instantiate orchestrator πt conditioned on Ωt.
13:
Evaluate (πt, Ωt) on a subset of training problems; observe performance score uω ∈[0, 1]
(Sec. 4.2).
14:
Update ˆµω(t) and nω(t) for each ω ∈Ωt.
15: end for
include it:
uω =
1
|T tω|
X
τ∈T t
ω
1{τ is successful},
where T t
ω is the set of trajectories at round t in which ω is used by the orchestrator π. However,
this suffers from a “free-rider” problem: a sub-agent may appear effective simply because it often
co-occurs with strong sub-agents, even if it contributes little itself.
To overcome this, we adopt a hindsight-based credit assignment strategy. The idea is to reward
a sub-agent whenever its actions help the orchestrator make progress toward solving the problem,
even if the orchestrator ultimately fails. Thus, sub-agents that provide useful intermediate steps
are credited, while those that do not are penalized, regardless of the outcomes. Concretely, let
τ = (a1, o1, . . . , aT , oT ) denote the trajectory of actions and observations produced during problem
solving. For each sub-agent ω that appears in τ, we query an LLM judge (Appendix A.1.4) with the
trajectory and obtain a binary label ℓω(τ) ∈{0, 1}, where ℓω(τ) = 1 indicates that the LLM judge
deems ω’s contribution in the trajectory as helpful. The performance score of sub-agent ω is then
defined as the empirical average over all evaluated trajectories:
uω =
1
|T tω|
X
τ∈T t
ω
ℓω(τ).
This hindsight-based score uω ∈[0, 1] provides a more reliable estimate of the utility of ω than
success rates. By directly linking credit to judged contributions, it avoids free-riding effects.
5
EXPERIMENTS
Our experiments address the central question: Can properly designed hierarchical multi-agent
systems improve the generalization performance of SWE agents? We further analyze how the systems
discovered by our algorithm differ from human-designed ones and examine the contribution of each
design choice to the overall performance gains.
5.1
SETUP
Task format and datasets.
We evaluate on the SWE-BENCH benchmarks: SWE-BENCH VERIFIED
(500 instances) [25] and SWE-BENCH LIVE (300 instances) [54]. VERIFIED is a curated, frozen
set of real GitHub issues, while LIVE continuously adds newly collected, human-verified issues
from active repositories, making it more resistant to data contamination [46] and better suited for
6


Preprint
testing generalization to out-of-distribution problems. Each instance includes a GitHub issue, a
repository-specific container image, and an executable test harness. The agent must interact with the
repository (files and, when available, history) and produce a patch that resolves the issue by passing
all tests (pass-to-pass and fail-to-pass).
To avoid overfitting and limit design-time compute, we construct a small yet diverse design set by
sampling one random issue per repository (12 total) from VERIFIED, which we find to be sufficient
based on an ablation over design-set size (A.3.1). The design set is disjoint from all issues in LIVE.
All results in Tables 2 and 3 are reported on VERIFIED and LIVE (lite) splits. We also report the
result of BOAD on VERIFIED (HELD OUT) that exclude the 12 issues used in the design set.
Optimization Details
During BOAD optimization, we run B = 20 rounds of the bandit loop
(Algorithm 1) (testing on up to 100 rounds shows that sub-agents created after around 20 rounds
are generally worse, and 20 iterations is enough to converge to a state where helpful rate and UCB
rankings align). Each time a new sub-agent is created, the sub-agent first goes through a warm-
up process, which uses randomly sampled instances from the design set to iteratively refine the
documentation/instance prompt of the sub-agent, ensuring that the sub-agent is usable. We use
W = 4 rounds for the warm-up process. Each round samples K = 3 sub-agents and evaluates
them on the design set. The optimization took around 12 hours on a machine with 56 CPU cores
and 440GB RAM. For running SWE-agent (orchestrator and sub-agent LLM inference), we deploy
Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct on one H100 GPU node. Note that by the tenth iteration, the top-2 most
helpful subagents are the same as the ones converged on later. Running B = 10 iterations took less
than 7 hours.
Implementation.
All experiments use the SWE-AGENT scaffold with a set of default tools from
SWE-agent [48]: edit anthropic (file viewing/editing), bash (restricted shell commands),
and submit. The orchestrator calls sub-agents through the same XML-based tool-calling API,
passing information via a context parameter; sub-agents return outputs through this channel without
access to the orchestrator’s history. We use Claude-4 to generate candidate designs (Section 4.1) with
temperature 0.0 and evaluate sub-agent helpfulness (Section 4.2). For execution, both orchestrator and
sub-agents use Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct with temperature 0.0, unless specified, a strong instruction-
following model that is not heavily tuned on SWE tasks. This choice ensures improvements reflect
the benefit of orchestration rather than fine-tuning on SWE-task specific data. Each sub-agent is
equipped with prompts discovered by BOAD, defined with docstrings and argument specs, and given
access to the same default tools as the orchestrator.
Finally, for evaluation, we use the two subagents with the highest helpfulness score (the hindsight-
based score) found during the subagent discovery (Appendix A.2.1). We also ablate by varying k in
the top-k selection and by using success rate instead of helpfulness as the ranking metric (Section 5.3).
5.2
MAIN RESULTS
Success Rate
Table 1 shows that with Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct, BOAD resolves 20.0% of issues on
LIVE, ranking second on the leaderboard at the time of evaluation and outperforming larger models
in popular scaffolds (e.g., GPT-4o, DeepSeek-V3, GLM-4.5-Air, Claude 3.7 Sonnet). This is a 63%
improvement over the same model with default SWE-agent tools. On VERIFIED, BOAD achieves
53.12%, surpassing many larger models (e.g., GPT-4o, Claude 3.5 Sonnet OpenHands, DeepSeek-R1,
DeepSeek-V3) and setting a new state of the art among smaller models (e.g., Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B-
Instruct, Devstral-Small-2505), with a 13.4% gain over the default SWE-agent. Interestingly, adding
manually designed sub-agents (Appendix A.2.4) from prior work [8; 34; 14] lowers performance,
indicating that human-crafted roles can be misaligned with LLM behavior. Overall, these results
demonstrate that BOAD automatically discovers orchestrator–sub-agent structures that not only
boost in-distribution performance but also generalize more effectively to out-of-distribution tasks.
Comparison with Evolutionary Baseline
We also implement an evolutionary search for a multi-
agent system adapted from Automated Design of Agentic Systems [23], as a baseline to compare
BOAD against. Implementation details for the evolutionary search are provided in Appendix A.4.1.
When using the same number of evaluation instances (i.e., number of SWE-Bench patches generated),
we find that the sub-agents generated by the evolutionary search achieve worse performance (17.0%
7


Preprint
vs 20.0% on SWE-Bench-Live) than BOAD. Additionally, for the same number of iterations, the
cost of Claude API calls is more than double that of BOAD due to the need of generating many
sub-agents at each iteration, whereas BOAD reuses subagents across iterations.
Table 1: Success rate on SWE-BENCH VERIFIED and SWE-BENCH LIVE.
Scale
Model
Scaffold
Verified Resolved (%)
Live Resolved (%)
Large
GPT-4o [48]
SWE-agent
23.0
10.0
GPT-4o [47]
Agentless
38.8
11.7
Claude 3.5 Sonnet [5]
Agentless
50.8
–
Claude 3.5 Sonnet [5]
OpenHands
53.0
–
Claude 3.7 Sonnet [4]
SWE-agent
62.4
13.71
Claude 4.0 Sonnet [6]
SWE-agent
66.8
–
Claude 4.0 Sonnet [6]
OpenHands
70.4
–
DeepSeek-R1 [21]
Agentless
49.2
–
DeepSeek-V3 [18]
Agentless
42.0
13.3
GLM-4.5-Air [41]
OpenHands
57.6
–
GLM-4.5-Air [41]
SWE-Agent
–
17.7
Qwen3-Coder 480B/A35B Instruct [43]
OpenHands
69.6
24.7
Small
Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B-Instruct [43]
SWE-agent
–
17.0
Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B-Instruct [43]
OpenHands
51.6
–
Devstral-Small-2505 [7]
OpenHands
46.8
–
Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct [42]
SWE-agent (baseline)
49.8
12.3
Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct [42]
SWE-agent + Manual Sub-agent
47.4
14.0
Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct [42]
SWE-agent + Evolutionary Search
46.0
17.0
Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct [42]
SWE-agent + BOAD
53.22
20.0
Token Analysis
In addition to success rate, we analyze the test-time token usage of the hierar-
chical multi-agent system discovered by BOAD in comparison to the default single-agent system.
Hierarchical multi-agent systems introduce communication overhead, since agents must exchange
information, but they can also reduce context length: sub-agents focus on specialized sub-tasks while
the orchestrator handles high-level coordination without low-level details. Table 2 compares token
usage between SWE-agent and BOAD. Total tokens refer to the average sum of input and output
tokens per issue, while max input tokens capture the average maximum input length per instance.
Surprisingly, the total token count is comparable—and even lower on SWE-bench-live—than in
the original SWE-agent. Moreover, BOAD consistently reduces input tokens, confirming that task
decomposition shortens context length.
Table 2: Token usage. BOAD lowers input token counts, thus shortening the model’s input context length.
Metric
Setting
Verified
Live
Total tokens (M)
SWE-agent
0.92
1.49
SWE-agent + BOAD
0.93 (+0.7%)
1.13 (-23.8%)
Max input tokens
SWE-agent
34.6k
49.0k
SWE-agent+BOAD
30.5k (-11.6%)
36.7k (-25.0%)
5.3
ABLATION STUDIES AND ANALYSIS
Does prompt optimization explain the gains? One possible explanation for BOAD ’s performance
improvement is that it simply arises from better prompt optimization of SWE-agent. To test this, we
introduce a baseline that optimizes the SWE-agent prompt without adding sub-agents (w/o Sub-agent).
We run 10 iterations: in each, a new SWE-agent prompt is generated by prompting Claude-4 with
the template shown in A.1.5, evaluated on 12 issues (the same setting as BOAD). The first iteration
is initialized without history, and from the second onward, prompt generation is conditioned on the
top five prompts from previous rounds, ranked by performance. Results in Table 3 show that prompt
optimization alone does not reach the performance of BOAD, indicating that the gains are not solely
due to prompt tuning but from the discovery of effective sub-agents and orchestration.
1The SWE-bench-live leaderboard score was 17.7, based on an earlier issue set from April 2025.
253.1 on the SWE-bench-verified set excluding the 12 issues used in the design set.
8


Preprint
Table 3: Ablation studies and analysis. Each row corresponds to one research question. Results are reported on
SWE-bench Live using Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct unless otherwise specified.
Research Question
Configuration
SWE-Bench Live (%)
Does prompt optimization explain the
gains?
w/o Sub-agent
16.3
w Sub-agent
20.0
Do more sub-agents improve
performance?
Top-5 sub-agents
13.7
Top-4 sub-agents
16.7
Top-3 sub-agents
16.3
Top-2 sub-agents
20.0
Top-1 sub-agent
16.3
Do we need to customize the
orchestrator?
w/o customization
16.7
w customization
20.0
Is expanding the sub-agent archive
needed?
w/o expansion
17.0
w expansion
20.0
Is hindsight credit assignment
necessary?
Top-3 subagents (success rate)
11.3
Top-3 subagents (helpfulness)
16.3
Top-2 subagents (success rate)
15.3
Top-2 subagents (helpfulness)
20.0
Are discovered sub-agents transferable
to other models?
Claude 3.7 Sonnet
13.7
+ Top-2 sub-agents (helpfulness)
16.3
Do more sub-agents improve performance? One might expect performance to improve as more
sub-agents are added, since each can specialize. To test this, we vary the number of top-K sub-agents
from 1 to 5 based on the helpfulness score (Section 4.2) and evaluate on LIVE. Surprisingly, Table
3 shows that performance peaks with exactly two sub-agents, achieving 60/300 (20.0%). A single
sub-agent (49/300) fails to leverage specialization, while larger teams of three (49/300), four (50/300),
or five (41/300) reduce performance due to communication and coordination overhead. These results
suggest that small, focused teams strike the best balance, outperforming both minimal and overly
large teams of sub-agents.
Do we need to customize the orchestrator? We next ask whether gains come solely from sub-agent
discovery or if the orchestrator must also adapt to its team. We compare two prompting strategies:
(i) a generic prompt encouraging sub-agent calls (Appendix A.1.1), and (ii) a customized prompt
generated by Claude-4 that explicitly references the top two sub-agents (selected by helpfulness
scores) and outlines a plan for using them. Both settings use the same sub-agent set, but only the
customized prompt allows the orchestrator to reason about and plan calls to specific sub-agents.
Results in Table 3 show the customized orchestrator (w customization) achieves 60/300 (20.0%),
versus 50/300 (16.7%) (w/o customization) for the generic one. This indicates that while sub-agents
provide new capabilities, the orchestrator must also be specialized to effectively coordinate them.
Is expanding the sub-agent archive needed? As discussed in Section 4.1, the initial archive may be
limited, and adding new sub-agents during the design process could be necessary to discover stronger
ones. To test this, we compare orchestrator performance using (i) sub-agents from the initial archive
(w/o expansion) and (ii) sub-agents selected at the end of the design process (w expansion). Both
settings use two sub-agents, consistent with our best configuration in Section 5.2, and the orchestrator
is generated as described in Section 4.1. Results in Table 3 show that final sub-agents outperform
those from the initial archive, highlighting the importance of expanding the archive over time.
Is hindsight credit assignment necessary? To address free-riding issues in sub-agent selection
(Section 4.1), we use a helpfulness score to measure each sub-agent’s contribution. To test its
importance, we compare orchestrator performance when sub-agents are selected by (i) individual
success rate versus (ii) helpfulness score. As shown in Table 3, helpfulness-based selection consis-
tently outperforms success-rate selection, indicating that hindsight credit assignment (Section 4.2) is
essential for identifying useful sub-agents.
Are discovered sub-agents transferable to other models? Since BOAD optimizes sub-agents
for a specific model, we ask whether the best sub-agents differ across models and whether effective
9


Preprint
sub-agents can transfer. To test this, we apply the sub-agents from Section 5.2 to SWE-agent+Claude-
3.7-Sonnet. As shown in Table 3, the discovered sub-agents do transfer to some extent, though the
gains are smaller than those achieved with Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct, the model used for sub-agent
optimization.
5.4
QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF SINGLE- VS MULTI-AGENT OUTCOMES
We manually inspected trajectories in which the single- and multi-agent systems produced different
outcomes. Three recurring patterns emerged:
1. Over-editing (multi-agent advantage). Single agents frequently produced extremely long
patches, including attempts to create new tests and edits outside the scope of the bug. Such patches
inflate apply time and increase the chance of failing pass-to-pass, even if the agent is able
to address the primary fault. In contrast, the multi-agent system tended to emit short, localized
patches, highlighting the advantage of separating phases like localization and editing/testing.
2. Multi-site fixes and coverage (multi-agent advantage). When the fix required edits at multiple
call sites or modules, the single agent often either over-edited unrelated regions or missed one
or more necessary locations. The hierarchical system mitigated both omission and extraneous
edits by delegating to a sub-agent for localization, which did a thorough analysis of the repository
before making any targeted modifications.
3. Error propagation from unvalidated sub-agent outputs (multi-agent failure mode). In a
minority of cases, the multi-agent system failed while the single agent succeeded. Inspecting these
outputs, we found that erroneous sub-agent outputs (e.g., incomplete span identification, misinter-
pretation of the issue) were accepted as ground truth by the orchestrator, leading subsequent steps
astray. Because there is no intermediate validation or self-checking, the orchestrator has limited
ability to recover from such upstream errors.
These observations align with our hypothesis: hierarchical delegation constrains edit scope and
improves coverage of multi-site fixes, but introduces a new dependency on the quality of sub-agent
handoffs. Incorporating lightweight verification (e.g., span cross-checks, invariant tests, or dual-read
localization) is a promising mitigation for the third failure mode.
6
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
We present BOAD, a framework that formulates hierarchical multi-agent design as a sequential,
online decision making problem to automatically discover multi-agent systems for long-horizon
software engineering tasks. Our experiments show that automatically discovered sub-agents, when
combined with a customized orchestrator, outperform single-agent and manually designed multi-agent
systems on both SWE-BENCH VERIFIED and SWE-BENCH LIVE.
Limitations and Future Work: We find that discovered sub-agents transfer across models only
partially and failure cases highlight error propagation when orchestrators unconditionally accept
sub-agent outputs. Future work should explore evolution on large models, adaptive team sizing,
verification, as well as extending the framework to domains beyond software engineering.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank members of the Improbable AI Lab at MIT and MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab for helpful
discussions and feedback.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
• Iris Xu: Led the project, implemented and designed the core algorithm, conducted all the experi-
ments, and wrote the experiment section.
• Guangtao Zeng: Implemented the baselines, explored the preliminary design of the ideas of this
work, and wrote the related work section.
10


Preprint
• Zexue He: Explored the preliminary design of the ideas of this work and helped revise the
manuscript.
• Charles Jin: Assisted and supported the implementation of our method.
• Aldo Pareja: Assisted and supported writing.
• Dan Gutfreund: Coordinated the compute and infrastructure.
• Chuang Gan: Coordinated the compute and infrastructure.
• Zhang-Wei Hong: Led the writing and ideation of the project, coordinated the team and resources,
and explored the preliminary design of the ideas of this work.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Coding agents hold strong promise for automating code generation and bug fixing, but they also
carry risks of unintended or harmful outputs. For instance, an LLM-based agent may produce
commands that could compromise a system (e.g., downloading unauthorized packages or deleting
user files with rm -rf). To mitigate these risks in our study, all experiments were conducted within
Docker containers, providing isolated and sandboxed environments that prevent harmful commands
from impacting real user devices and substantially reducing the potential for actual harm. Our
implementation also builds upon the SWE-Agent framework, which has been previously published
and reviewed under established ethical standards. We carefully follow its curated protocols and
licensing requirements.
Nevertheless, as with any AI-based coding agent framework, there remains the risk of deliberate
misuse, for example, a malicious user prompting the system to generate harmful or hacking code.
While our contribution is centered on advancing the technical design of hierarchical coding agents,
we emphasize that real-world deployment should be coupled with responsible auditing and oversight,
so that potential misuse and unintended consequences can be effectively mitigated.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
For all open-source LLMs (e.g., Seed-OSS-36B-Instruct, Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B-Instruct), we rely
on their official releases. Commercial LLMs and LLM-based tools are accessed through their official
APIs and reference implementations. We provide detailed implementation notes of BOAD, including
the prompt design for meta-agents, sub-agents, and LLM judges, in Section 5.1. To further support
reproducibility and foster future research, we will also release all of our code, used data, and prompts.
REFERENCES
[1] Alekh Agarwal, Haipeng Luo, Behnam Neyshabur, and Robert E Schapire. Corralling a band
of bandit algorithms. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 12–38. PMLR, 2017.
[2] Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-
Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts,
Koushik Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab.
Gepa: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2507.19457.
[3] David J Aldous. Exchangeability and related topics. In ´Ecole d’ ´Et´e de Probabilit´es de Saint-
Flour XIII—1983, pp. 1–198. Springer, 2006.
[4] Anthropic. Claude 3.7 sonnet and claude code, 2025. URL https://www.anthropic.
com/news/claude-3-7-sonnet.
[5] Anthropic.
Claude 3.5 sonnet, 2025.
URL https://www.anthropic.com/news/
claude-3-5-sonnet.
[6] Anthropic. Introducing claude 4, 2025. URL https://www.anthropic.com/news/
claude-4.
11


Preprint
[7] Anthropic. Devstral, 2025. URL https://mistral.ai/news/devstral.
[8] Daman Arora, Atharv Sonwane, Nalin Wadhwa, Abhav Mehrotra, Saiteja Utpala, Ramakrishna
Bairi, Aditya Kanade, and Nagarajan Natarajan. Masai: Modular architecture for software-
engineering ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11638, 2024.
[9] Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E Schapire. The nonstochastic
multiarmed bandit problem. SIAM journal on computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.
[10] Andrew G Barto and Sridhar Mahadevan. Recent advances in hierarchical reinforcement
learning. Discrete Event Dynamic Systems, 13(4):341–379, 2003.
[11] Andrew G Barto and Sridhar Mahadevan. Recent advances in hierarchical reinforcement
learning. Discrete event dynamic systems, 13(4):341–379, 2003.
[12] James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. The
journal of machine learning research, 13(1):281–305, 2012.
[13] Hans-Georg Beyer and Hans-Paul Schwefel. Evolution strategies–a comprehensive introduction.
Natural computing, 1(1):3–52, 2002.
[14] Dong Chen, Shaoxin Lin, Muhan Zeng, Daoguang Zan, Jian-Gang Wang, Anton Cheshkov, Jun
Sun, Hao Yu, Guoliang Dong, Artem Aliev, et al. Coder: Issue resolving with multi-agent and
task graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01304, 2024.
[15] Guangyao Chen, Siwei Dong, Yu Shu, Ge Zhang, Jaward Sesay, B¨orje Karlsson, Jie Fu, and
Yemin Shi. Autoagents: A framework for automatic agent generation. In Proceedings of the
Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2024, Jeju, South
Korea, August 3-9, 2024, pp. 22–30. ijcai.org, 2024. URL https://www.ijcai.org/
proceedings/2024/3.
[16] Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chi-Min Chan, Heyang Yu,
Yaxi Lu, Yi-Hsin Hung, Chen Qian, et al. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration
and exploring emergent behaviors. In ICLR, 2024.
[17] Chris Dann, Claudio Gentile, and Aldo Pacchiano. Data-driven online model selection with
regret guarantees. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
1531–1539. PMLR, 2024.
[18] DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu,
Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian
Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao,
Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Haowei Zhang,
Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo,
Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong
Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean
Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li,
Miaojun Wang, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian,
Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du,
R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu
Zhang, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing Wu,
Shengfeng Ye, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng
Zhou, Shuting Pan, T. Wang, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, W. L. Xiao, Wangding Zeng,
Wanjia Zhao, Wei An, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang,
X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen,
Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang,
Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi
Zhou, Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, Y. K. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X. Wei,
Y. X. Zhu, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanhong Xu, Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng
Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu, Yi Zheng, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying
He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang Guo,
Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun Zha,
12


Preprint
Yunfan Xiong, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou,
Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang,
Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong
Shao, Zhipeng Xu, Zhiyu Wu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu,
Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Ziyi Gao, and Zizheng Pan. Deepseek-v3 technical report,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437.
[19] Thomas G Dietterich. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with the maxq value function
decomposition. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 118–126. Morgan Kaufmann, 2000.
[20] Dylan J Foster, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Haipeng Luo. Model selection for contextual
bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[21] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in
llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
[22] Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian,
and Yujiu Yang. Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful
prompt optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZG3RaNIsO8.
[23] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.08435, 2024.
[24] Yu Jiang, Ke Wang, Xin Wang, Yanyan Zhao, and Zhiqiang Zhang. Extracting concise bug-
fixing patches from human-written patches in version control systems. In Proceedings of the
43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 1351–1362. IEEE/ACM,
2021.
[25] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.06770, 2023.
[26] Jaehun Kim, Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, Karthik Narasimhan, et al. Promptbreeder: Self-
referential self-improvement via prompt evolution. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[27] Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesv´ari. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In European
conference on machine learning, pp. 282–293. Springer, 2006.
[28] Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesv´ari. Bandit algorithms. 2020.
[29] Haitao Li, Qian Dong, Junjie Chen, Huixue Su, Yujia Zhou, Qingyao Ai, Ziyi Ye, and Yiqun
Liu. Llms-as-judges: a comprehensive survey on llm-based evaluation methods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.05579, 2024.
[30] Han Li, Yuling Shi, Shaoxin Lin, Xiaodong Gu, Heng Lian, Xin Wang, Yantao Jia, Tao Huang,
and Qianxiang Wang. Swe-debate: Competitive multi-agent debate for software issue resolution.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23348, 2025.
[31] Fernanda Madeiral, Thomas Durieux, Matias Martinez, and Martin Monperrus. Bears: An
extensible java bug benchmark for automatic program repair studies. In Proceedings of the 26th
IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER),
pp. 468–478. IEEE, 2019.
[32] George A Miller. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity
for processing information. Psychological review, 63(2):81, 1956.
[33] Allen Newell and Herbert A Simon. Computer science as empirical inquiry: Symbols and
search. Communications of the ACM, 19(3):113–126, 1976.
13


Preprint
[34] Huy Nhat Phan, Tien N Nguyen, Phong X Nguyen, and Nghi DQ Bui. Hyperagent: Generalist
software engineering agents to solve coding tasks at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16299,
2024.
[35] Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming.
John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
[36] Melanie Sclar, Yejin Choi, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Alane Suhr. Quantifying language models’
sensitivity to spurious features in prompt design or: How i learned to start worrying about
prompt formatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11324, 2023.
[37] Herbert A Simon. The structure of ill structured problems. Artificial intelligence, 4(3-4):
181–201, 1973.
[38] Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec
Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
[39] Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A
framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):
181–211, 1999.
[40] Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A
framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial Intelligence, 112(1-2):
181–211, 1999.
[41] 5 Team, Aohan Zeng, Xin Lv, Qinkai Zheng, Zhenyu Hou, Bin Chen, Chengxing Xie, Cunxiang
Wang, Da Yin, Hao Zeng, Jiajie Zhang, Kedong Wang, Lucen Zhong, Mingdao Liu, Rui Lu,
Shulin Cao, Xiaohan Zhang, Xuancheng Huang, Yao Wei, Yean Cheng, Yifan An, Yilin Niu,
Yuanhao Wen, Yushi Bai, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Zilin Zhu, Bohan Zhang, Bosi Wen,
Bowen Wu, Bowen Xu, Can Huang, Casey Zhao, Changpeng Cai, Chao Yu, Chen Li, Chendi
Ge, Chenghua Huang, Chenhui Zhang, Chenxi Xu, Chenzheng Zhu, Chuang Li, Congfeng
Yin, Daoyan Lin, Dayong Yang, Dazhi Jiang, Ding Ai, Erle Zhu, Fei Wang, Gengzheng Pan,
Guo Wang, Hailong Sun, Haitao Li, Haiyang Li, Haiyi Hu, Hanyu Zhang, Hao Peng, Hao Tai,
Haoke Zhang, Haoran Wang, Haoyu Yang, He Liu, He Zhao, Hongwei Liu, Hongxi Yan, Huan
Liu, Huilong Chen, Ji Li, Jiajing Zhao, Jiamin Ren, Jian Jiao, Jiani Zhao, Jianyang Yan, Jiaqi
Wang, Jiayi Gui, Jiayue Zhao, Jie Liu, Jijie Li, Jing Li, Jing Lu, Jingsen Wang, Jingwei Yuan,
Jingxuan Li, Jingzhao Du, Jinhua Du, Jinxin Liu, Junkai Zhi, Junli Gao, Ke Wang, Lekang Yang,
Liang Xu, Lin Fan, Lindong Wu, Lintao Ding, Lu Wang, Man Zhang, Minghao Li, Minghuan
Xu, Mingming Zhao, Mingshu Zhai, Pengfan Du, Qian Dong, Shangde Lei, Shangqing Tu,
Shangtong Yang, Shaoyou Lu, Shijie Li, Shuang Li, Shuang-Li, Shuxun Yang, Sibo Yi, Tianshu
Yu, Wei Tian, Weihan Wang, Wenbo Yu, Weng Lam Tam, Wenjie Liang, Wentao Liu, Xiao
Wang, Xiaohan Jia, Xiaotao Gu, Xiaoying Ling, Xin Wang, Xing Fan, Xingru Pan, Xinyuan
Zhang, Xinze Zhang, Xiuqing Fu, Xunkai Zhang, Yabo Xu, Yandong Wu, Yida Lu, Yidong
Wang, Yilin Zhou, Yiming Pan, Ying Zhang, Yingli Wang, Yingru Li, Yinpei Su, Yipeng
Geng, Yitong Zhu, Yongkun Yang, Yuhang Li, Yuhao Wu, Yujiang Li, Yunan Liu, Yunqing
Wang, Yuntao Li, Yuxuan Zhang, Zezhen Liu, Zhen Yang, Zhengda Zhou, Zhongpei Qiao,
Zhuoer Feng, Zhuorui Liu, Zichen Zhang, Zihan Wang, Zijun Yao, Zikang Wang, Ziqiang Liu,
Ziwei Chai, Zixuan Li, Zuodong Zhao, Wenguang Chen, Jidong Zhai, Bin Xu, Minlie Huang,
Hongning Wang, Juanzi Li, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. Glm-4.5: Agentic, reasoning, and
coding (arc) foundation models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.06471.
[42] ByteDance Seed Team.
Seed-oss open-source models.
https://github.com/
ByteDance-Seed/seed-oss, 2025.
[43] Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.
09388.
[44] Yee Whye Teh, Michael I Jordan, Matthew J Beal, and David M Blei. Hierarchical dirichlet
processes. Journal of the american statistical association, 101(476):1566–1581, 2006.
14


Preprint
[45] Dong Wang, Yu Li, Ming Jiang, Lu Zhang, and Zhiqiang Chen. A systematic mapping study of
bug reproduction and fault localization. Information and Software Technology, 167:107316,
2024.
[46] Mingqi Wu, Zhihao Zhang, Qiaole Dong, Zhiheng Xi, Jun Zhao, Senjie Jin, Xiaoran Fan,
Yuhao Zhou, Huijie Lv, Ming Zhang, et al. Reasoning or memorization? unreliable results of
reinforcement learning due to data contamination. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.10532, 2025.
[47] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Agentless: Demystifying
llm-based software engineering agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
01489.
[48] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software
engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652, 2024.
[49] Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, and Deqing Yang. Evoagent:
Towards automatic multi-agent generation via evolutionary algorithms. In Proceedings of the
2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6192–6217, 2025.
[50] Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Zhang-Wei Hong, Aldo Pacchiano, and Pulkit Agrawal. Orso: Ac-
celerating reward design via online reward selection and policy optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.13837, 2024.
[51] Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin godel machine:
Open-ended evolution of self-improving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22954, 2025.
[52] Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xionghui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen
Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, et al. Aflow: Automating agentic workflow
generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10762, 2024.
[53] Kexun Zhang, Weiran Yao, Zuxin Liu, Yihao Feng, Zhiwei Liu, Rithesh Murthy, Tian Lan, Lei
Li, Renze Lou, Jiacheng Xu, et al. Diversity empowers intelligence: Integrating expertise of
software engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07060, 2024.
[54] Linghao Zhang, Shilin He, Chaoyun Zhang, Yu Kang, Bowen Li, Chengxing Xie, Junhao
Wang, Maoquan Wang, Yufan Huang, Shengyu Fu, et al. Swe-bench goes live! arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.23419, 2025.
[55] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Sch¨arli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale
Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables
complex reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.
[56] Han Zhou, Xingchen Wan, Ruoxi Sun, Hamid Palangi, Shariq Iqbal, Ivan Vuli´c, Anna Korhonen,
and Sercan ¨O Arık. Multi-agent design: Optimizing agents with better prompts and topologies.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02533, 2025.
[57] Yuhang Zhou, Paiheng Xu, Xiaoyu Liu, Bang An, Wei Ai, and Furong Huang. Explore spurious
correlations at the concept level in language models for text classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.08648, 2023.
[58] Terry Yue Zhuo, Minh Chien Vu, Jenny Chim, Han Hu, Wenhao Yu, Ratnadira Widyasari,
Imam Nur Bani Yusuf, Haolan Zhan, Junda He, Indraneil Paul, et al. Bigcodebench: Bench-
marking code generation with diverse function calls and complex instructions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.15877, 2024.
15


Preprint
A
EXPERIMENT DETAILS
A.1
PROMPT TEMPLATES
A.1.1
PROMPT TEMPLATE FOR REFINING SUB-AGENT DURING WARMUP STAGE
Prompt template for refining subagent during warmup stage
You are improving a subagent's prompts/config for a software engineering (SWE) automation system, based
on recent run trajectories. The subagent is used by an AI main agent to address code issues.
,→
CONTEXT
- You will receive trajectory summaries below, starting with the main agent's trajectory, followed by
any subagent trajectories in call order.
,→
- Each summary shows what the agent did, what was observed, and how far it progressed.
GOAL
Analyze the subagent's performance and suggest improvements to make it:
1. More discoverable by the main agent (when appropriate)
2. More reliable in its behavior
3. More useful in its output
ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK
Consider these questions:
- Did the main agent discover and use the subagent when it should have?
- Did the subagent behave as expected and return useful information?
- Were there missed opportunities or inefficient behaviors?
IMPROVEMENT TYPES
Focus on one or more of these areas:
1. **docstring**: Make the subagent easier for the main agent to discover and choose appropriately.
CRITICAL: Make sure to include "[subagent]" at the beginning of the docstring.
,→
2. **context_description**: Improve the description of the 'context' argument (the only argument) to be
clearer and more helpful
,→
3. **instance_template**: Better incorporation of context, clearer framing for each problem instance
Note that the docstring and context_description are visible only to the main agent, while the
instance_template is visible only to the subagent.
,→
Thus, if the subagent was not called, you should not edit instance_template. Similarly, if the only
issue is the subagent's trajectory, not how it was called, do not edit docstring or
context_description.
,→
,→
PRINCIPLES
- Make surgical, targeted improvements rather than broad rewrites
- Preserve existing style and capabilities. Only edit components that need improvement.
- Focus on clarity, discoverability, and reliability
- Ensure generality. Avoid repo- or issue-specific assumptions.
- CRITICAL: DO NOT WRITE ANYTHING SPECIFIC TO THE PARTICULAR CODEBASE, PROJECT, OR DOMAIN.
OUTPUT FORMAT
First, explain your reasoning about what issues you noticed with the provided trajectory and what
improvements you're making. Then, output the YAML in a code block.
,→
**IMPORTANT**: Only suggest edits when you identify a clear, specific problem. If the entire subagent
is working well, use an empty updates dictionary.
,→
Sample outputs:
**When improvements are needed:**
Explain your reasoning here.
```yaml
updates:
docstring: "<improved docstring if needed>"
context_description: "<improved context argument description if needed>"
instance_template: "<improved instance template if needed>"
```
RULES
- Only include keys that you intend to change.
- Start with `updates:` as the top-level key. If there are no updates to make, the value for `updates`
should be an empty dictionary.
,→
- You may update any combination of the three fields (docstring, context_description,
instance_template), but only include a field if it needs improvement.
,→
- No explanations or extra content in the YAML
- Keep each field concise but complete
HEURISTICS
- **Discovery issues**: Strengthen docstring with clear use cases and when to invoke
- **Insufficient context passed to subagent**: Improve context_description with clearer argument
explanation
,→
- **Subagent behavior and output (Incorrect subagent trajectory or return information)**: Improve
instance_template with better instructions and output specifications
,→
{{TRAJECTORIES}}
16


Preprint
A.1.2
META AGENT PROMPTS
Prompt for generating a new subagent configuration
You are an expert at designing custom tools for SWE-agent, an autonomous agent that can resolve code
issues in large repositories.
,→
YOUR TASK
Invent a subagent tool for SWE-agent.
- The subagent should enable the main agent to better perform its task of automatically resolving code
issues in large static repositories.
,→
- Design for broad applicability across the full workflow. Create broad subagents that are can solve an
entire step of the pipeline, such as:
,→
- code localization
- reproducing issues and running scripts/tests
- code editing/patching
- code testing
- The subagents created should ONLY be focused on correctness of the final patch (e.g. style,
complexity of code does not matter)
,→
- PRIORITIZE TOKEN EFFICIENCY: Design concise, focused subagents that use minimal tokens. Avoid verbose
explanations or redundant information that wastes tokens.
,→
- If you see a subagent that looks good but has bad token efficieny, you may generate a similar
subagent with the same function but better implementation.
,→
- The subagent takes a SINGLE argument that is a string, called "context".
- BE NOVEL! Think carefully about how to help the main agent perform one of its subtasks.
- Example subagents include localize, patch_editor, or code_tester.
- Do not create a subagent that overlaps with previous subagents (other than the token efficiency
situation).
,→
- In your reasoning, you must explicitly list which steps the subagent supports (examples: explore,
read/search, edit, run, validate) and the expected outputs for each supported step.
,→
- CRITICAL: Output exactly ONE YAML document with the tool under a single key, which is the name of
the tool.
,→
- The name of the tool should be simple and descriptive.
- The docstring for each tool should be comprehensive and describe what the output contains, as well
as the state of the repository after the subagent is finished (if files will be edited or not,
etc.).
,→
,→
The structure must be exactly as follows:
Add reasoning here about WHY you design this subgaent...
```yaml
tool_name:
signature: "tool_name <context>"
docstring: docstring: "comprehensive description of this subagent, the output, and the state of
repository on completion. Starts with '[subagent]:"
,→
arguments:
- name: context
type: string
description: "detailed description of what the context parameter should contain"
required: true
subagent: true
```
Sample output:
It may be useful to have a patch editor subagent. This would go well with previous subagents and help
the main agent more efficiently patch the issue.
,→
```yaml
patch_editor:
signature: "patch_editor <context>"
docstring: "[subagent] Fixes a specific part of code that has errors. Outputs the changes made with
reasoning. After calling, the correct changes are already implemented in the repository."
,→
arguments:
- name: context
type: string
description: "A string containing the specific file path to make edits in, the lines where edits
need to be made, a comprehensive description of the issue with the code (do not assume the
subagent has any information about the repository or problem statement), and what to edit."
,→
,→
required: true
subagent: true
```
{{PREVIOUS_ITERATION_FEEBACK}}
Prompt for generating subagent templates
You are an expert at creating SWE-agent subagent configuration files for automating code-patching tasks
in large GitHub repositories.
,→
Given a description of the subagent, you need to generate the system_template and instance_template
parts that will be used in the subagent configuration.
,→
IMPORTANT FORMATTING RULES:
- First output your reasoning that details your thinking process for creating the templates. Then,
output a yaml block with both templates.
,→
- Use MINIMAL spacing - avoid excessive blank lines
- Use only SINGLE blank lines between sections (never double or triple spacing)
- Keep templates compact and readable without unnecessary whitespace
- CRITICAL: Use YAML literal block syntax with | and |- (see example below)
- Do NOT use quoted strings - use literal blocks to avoid quotes in output
17


Preprint
- Replace ONLY text in [] with text specific to the subagent. Do NOT MODIFY any other parts.
- Copy EXACTLY the parts other than [], including how to call the functions (e.g.
"<function=example_function_here>")
,→
Output format:
[Reasoning here...]
```yaml
system_template: |
You are a helpful [role] assistant that can interact with a computer to [main task].
<IMPORTANT>
* If user provides a path, you should NOT assume it's relative to the current working directory.
Instead, you should explore the file system to find the file before working on it.
,→
</IMPORTANT>
You have access to the following functions:
{{command_docs}}
If you choose to call a function, you must ONLY reply in the following format with NO suffix:
Provide any reasoning for the function call here.
<function=example_function_name>
<parameter=example_parameter_1>value_1</parameter>
<parameter=example_parameter_2>
This is the value for the second parameter
that can span
multiple lines
</parameter>
</function>
(You must use the exact text function=" and "parameter=" for each function and argument, respectively,
e.g. <parameter=command>value</parameter>)
,→
<IMPORTANT>
Reminder:
- Function calls MUST follow the specified format, start with <function= and end with </function>
- Required parameters MUST be specified
- CRITICAL: Only call ONE function at a time
- Always provide reasoning for your function call in natural language BEFORE the function call (not
after)
,→
</IMPORTANT>
<pr_description>
{{problem_statement}}
</pr_description>
CRITICAL: Use the submit_subagent function to provide the results when you are finished with your
task.
,→
You are ONLY responsible for your specific assigned task. Do NOT attempt to resolve entire
pr_description, only your task.
,→
Your goal is to complete your task in the MINIMAL NUMBER of steps. Resolve the issue fast and call
submit_subagent as soon as possible.
,→
instance_template: |-
Your task:
[Provide detailed, step-by-step instructions for your assigned subagent task, tailored to your
specific role. The instructions must ONLY reference this subagent's function.]
,→
[If a context argument is provided, you MUST include its contents by inserting "{{context}}" here and
explaining what the parameter is.]
,→
**CRITICAL: STAY IN YOUR LANE**
- You are ONLY responsible for your specific assigned task
- You are NOT responsible for solving the entire issue
- You are NOT responsible for other subagent tasks
- Focus EXCLUSIVELY on your assigned task and nothing else
- CRITICAL: Call EXACTLY one function in your output!
- CRITICAL: When you are finished, immediately call submit_subagent. Do not call any other tools or
produce additional output.
,→
Focus exclusively on your assigned task and strictly follow these instructions. Do not attempt to
address unrelated parts of the PR or perform work outside your specific subagent role.
,→
Use the submit_subagent tool after you are finished with your specific task to provide a clear and
complete summary of your findings or changes.
,→
Your thinking should be thorough and so it's fine if it's very long.
```
Rules for generating templates:
1. The system_template should clearly define the subagent's role and capabilities based on the
available tools
,→
2. The instance_template should provide clear instructions for each task
3. Both templates should maintain consistent formatting with the base template
4. Ensure the templates encourage thorough analysis and clear documentation
5. MUST use literal block syntax: system_template: | and instance_template: |-
6. Never use quoted strings for templates
7. You should copy the given system template exactly other than the first sentence.
8. Modify the system template in the spots with [].
{{PREVIOUS_ITERATION_FEEDBACK}}
18


Preprint
A.1.3
CUSTOM ORCHESTRATOR PLAN PROMPT
Prompt template for generating a custom orchestrator plan given a set of subagents
You are a master workflow architect for automated software engineering. Your job is to design
innovative, strategic workflows that maximize the effectiveness of available tools.
,→
CONTEXT: You're designing workflows for an AI assistant that solves coding problems in software
repositories. The assistant receives a problem description (like a bug report, feature request, or
code issue) and needs to systematically work through the codebase to understand, fix, and validate
the solution. The assistant has access to specialized "subagents" - each designed for specific
aspects of the coding workflow.
,→
,→
,→
,→
You will be given a toolkit of specialized "subagents" - each with unique capabilities. Your challenge
is to:
,→
1. **Design** a comprehensive problem-solving plan that addresses the coding issue systematically
2. **Integrate** subagents strategically where they add the most value to your workflow
3. **Optimize** the sequence and wording of the plan to minimize the number of steps that the AI
assistant takes while remaining effective
,→
Think like a senior engineer designing a solution strategy. Consider:
- What are the key phases needed to solve this type of coding problem?
- Which subagents would be most valuable for specific phases?
- How can you combine subagent work with direct problem-solving phases?
- What's the most logical progression to integrate subagent input and output to solve the issue?
- How can you utilize subagents to minimize language model token usage and number of steps?
INPUT
- The available subagents will be provided inline between the following tags:
<available_subagents>
{{subagents_overview}}
</available_subagents>
The content in <available_subagents> lists each subagent with its name and short docs
(summary/description). Treat it as the authoritative source for tool names and purposes.
,→
WHAT TO OUTPUT
- Output ONLY your strategic plan as plain text (no YAML, no code fences, no headers).
- Each phase MUST start with a number and a period, e.g. "1. ...".
- For subagent phases, use the exact form: "Use the <name> subagent to ..."
- For direct phases, describe the action clearly without mentioning subagents, ensuring that it can be
applied to any problem.
,→
- Be creative and strategic - design workflows that combine different approaches effectively
- Keep 3 to 7 steps total, but make each step purposeful and well-reasoned
- Make sure the last steps are:
- After you have solved the issue, delete any test files or temporary files you created.
- Use the submit tool to submit the changes to the repository.
- Do not mention any function-call formats or system details
EXAMPLE (illustrative only; adapt to the given input)
<available_subagents>
- name: issue_localizer | Identify files and code regions relevant to the issue.
- name: error_reproducer | Reproduce the failing behavior and capture commands/outputs.
- name: code_tester | Run tests/commands to verify the fix and regressions.
</available_subagents>
Expected output EXAMPLE (plain text only):
1. Use the issue_localizer subagent to map the problem space and identify all potentially affected
files and code regions.
,→
2. Analyze the problem description and examine the identified files to understand the root cause and
requirements.
,→
3. Use the error_reproducer subagent to create a reproducible test case and capture the exact failure
conditions.
,→
4. Design and implement the fix based on the analysis, focusing on the specific files and code areas
identified.
,→
5. Use the code_tester subagent to validate the fix against the original failure case and run
regression tests.
,→
6. After you have solved the issue, delete any test files or temporary files you created.
7. Use the submit tool to submit the changes to the repository.
Now, based on the provided subagents, produce ONLY the numbered plan as plain text:
A.1.4
PROMPT TEMPLATE FOR CHECKING IF A SUB-AGENT WAS HELPFUL IN A GIVEN
INSTANCE
Prompt template for checking if a subagent was helpful in a given instance
CONTEXT:
These trajectories show a software engineering agent trying to fix a bug or implement a
feature. The agent can use various tools including subagents (specialized AI
assistants) to help solve the problem.
,→
,→
TRAJECTORIES:
{{TRAJECTORIES}}
19


Preprint
TOOL TO ANALYZE: {{TOOL_NAME}}
Your task is to determine if the subagent "{{TOOL_NAME}}" was helpful in this set of
trajectories.
,→
A tool is considered helpful if:
1. It was called/invoked by the main agent in the main agent trajectory
2. It provided useful information, analysis, or insights that contributed to solving the
problem
,→
3. The main agent made progress after using this tool (e.g., identified the issue, made
code changes, validated results, etc.)
,→
4. It completed its task as intended (followed proper analysis process, not just got
lucky results)
,→
Look for positive evidence such as:
- The subagent being called with appropriate parameters
- The subagent providing insights that led to code changes or problem understanding
- The main agent referencing or building upon the subagent's output
- The subagent's output being used in subsequent reasoning or actions
Look for negative evidence such as:
- The subagent not being called by the main agent, or called incorrectly
- The subagent providing irrelevant or incorrect information that was not later used
- The subagent's response was valid but did not move the main agent closer to resolving
the problem.
,→
- The subagent failed to execute properly or had many errors during the its run.
- The subagent's output appeared correct, but its trajectory did not actually achieve
those results (e.g., claimed to test code but just reported all tests passed).
,→
- The main agent had to call the subagent over and over again to get the proper results.
- The subagent trajectory was unnecessarily long or verbose, taking many steps to
complete its task
,→
- The main agent trajectory became inefficient due to excessive subagent calls or overly
verbose subagent responses
,→
- The subagent's results did not actually help the main agent make progress in resolve
the issue. If a subagent did not contribute to producing the correct patch, e.g. only
improved performance, style, or documentation, this is NOT helpful.
,→
,→
Respond with YAML format (exactly):
```yaml
helpful: true/false
reasoning: |
Brief explanation of why the tool was or wasn't helpful, including specific evidence
from the trajectories
,→
```
- Always use the block scalar `|` for `reasoning` and indent its text by two spaces.
- Only respond with the YAML block; no additional text before or after.
A.1.5
ORCHESTRATOR-ONLY PROMPT
Prompt template for generating an orchestrator prompt under orchestrator-only settings
You are a master workflow architect for automated software engineering. Your job is to design effective
workflows that solve coding problems efficiently.
,→
CONTEXT: You're designing workflows for an AI assistant that solves coding problems in software
repositories. The assistant receives a problem description (like a bug report, feature request, or
code issue) and needs to work through the codebase to understand, implement changes, and validate
the solution.
,→
,→
,→
Your goal is to create workflows that are both effective at solving problems and efficient in their
execution. Focus on designing strategic approaches that lead to successful problem resolution.
,→
CONTEXT FOR PLAN USAGE:
Your generated plan will be inserted into this agent template context:
```
I've uploaded a python code repository in the directory {{working_dir}}. Consider the following PR
description:
,→
<pr_description>
{{problem_statement}}
</pr_description>
20


Preprint
Can you help me implement the necessary changes to the repository so that the requirements specified in
the <pr_description> are met? I've already taken care of all changes to any of the test files
described in the <pr_description>. This means you DON'T have to modify the testing logic or any of
the tests in any way! Your task is to make the minimal changes to non-test files in the
{{working_dir}} directory to ensure the <pr_description> is satisfied. When solving the task,
**first create a plan by breaking the problem into subtasks**. Think systematically about the steps
needed to understand the problem, locate relevant code, implement changes, and verify the solution.
Follow this process:
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
{{plan}}
<-- YOUR PLAN GOES HERE
You MUST follow the plan exactly.
```
AVAILABLE TOOLS:
- bash: Execute shell commands for searching, testing, running scripts, exploring codebase structure
- str_replace_editor: View, create, and edit files with precise string replacement capabilities
- submit: Submit the final solution
LEARNING FROM HISTORY:
<sampled_templates>
{{sampled_templates_summary}}
</sampled_templates>
If historical templates are provided above, identify what made the highest-scoring approaches
successful and what caused failures. Look for patterns in tool usage, step efficiency, and
problem-solving strategies. If no history exists, design breakthrough approaches that challenge
conventional software engineering workflows.
,→
,→
,→
WHAT TO OUTPUT:
- Create a step-by-step plan that an AI agent can execute systematically
- Each step must clearly specify tool usage ("Use bash to..." or "Use str_replace_editor to...") and
expected outcomes
,→
- Design for Python repositories and PR-based problem solving
- Focus on minimal, targeted changes rather than broad exploration
- Structure as numbered steps (1., 2., 3., etc.) with logical flow
- Final step must use submit tool to deliver the solution
- Make each step actionable and specific enough for precise execution
- Output ONLY the numbered plan as plain text (no formatting, headers, or explanations)
A.2
SUB-AGENTS
A.2.1
BOAD TOP 2 DISCOVERED SUB-AGENT CONFIGURATIONS FOR
SEED-OSS-36B-INSTRUCT
issue analyzer configuration
docstring:
[subagent] Analyzes and structures issue descriptions, bug reports, or feature requests to extract key
information for systematic resolution planning. Best used at the beginning of issue resolution to
understand requirements, extract technical details, and plan investigation approach. Outputs
structured analysis including problem summary, affected components, reproduction criteria, success
conditions, and recommended investigation approach. Repository state unchanged - only analyzes the
provided issue context.
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
argument:
context (string) [required] : The complete issue description, bug report, feature request, or problem
statement text that needs to be analyzed and structured. Include the full original text to ensure
all requirements, technical details, constraints, and implementation notes are captured for
systematic analysis.
,→
,→
,→
instance template:
Your task: Analyze and structure the provided issue description to extract key information for
systematic resolution planning, based on the provided context: {{context}}
,→
Follow these steps:
1. Parse the issue description to extract core information: - Issue type (bug report, feature request,
enhancement, etc.) - Problem statement and symptoms - Expected vs actual behavior - Error messages
or failure descriptions - Affected functionality or components
,→
,→
2. Identify technical details: - File paths, function names, or code references mentioned - Stack
traces or error logs - Version information or environment details - Dependencies or configuration
issues
,→
,→
3. Structure reproduction criteria: - Steps to reproduce the issue - Required conditions or setup -
Input data or test cases needed - Expected failure modes or symptoms
,→
4. Define success conditions: - Clear criteria for issue resolution - Expected behavior after fix -
Verification methods or tests needed - Performance or quality requirements5. Recommend
investigation approach: - Priority areas to examine first - Suggested debugging or analysis methods
- Related components that may be affected - Potential root cause categories.
,→
,→
,→
6. Provide structured analysis including: - Concise problem summary - Categorized technical details -
Clear reproduction steps - Measurable success criteria - Systematic investigation plan - Risk
assessment and impact analysis
,→
,→
**CRITICAL: STAY IN YOUR LANE**- You are ONLY responsible for your specific assigned task- You are NOT
responsible for solving the entire issue- You are NOT responsible for other subagent tasks- Focus
EXCLUSIVELY on your assigned task and nothing else-
,→
,→
CRITICAL: Call EXACTLY one function in your output!-
21


Preprint
CRITICAL: When you are finished, immediately call submit_subagent. Do not call any other tools or
produce additional output.Focus exclusively on your assigned task and strictly follow these
instructions. Do not attempt to address unrelated parts of the PR or perform work outside your
specific subagent role.
,→
,→
,→
Use the submit_subagent tool after you are finished with your specific task to provide a clear and
complete summary of your findings or changes.
,→
Your thinking should be thorough and so it's fine if it's very long.
code navigator configuration
docstring:
[subagent] Explores and maps relevant code structure in large repositories. Outputs structured
information about key files, functions, classes, and their relationships. Repository state
unchanged - only reads and analyzes code without modifications.
,→
,→
argument:
context (string) [required] : A string containing the issue description, error messages, stack traces,
or specific code elements to investigate. Should include any relevant file paths, function names,
class names, or keywords that might help locate the problematic code.
,→
,→
instance template:
Your task: Explore and map the relevant code structure in the repository based on the provided context:
{{context}}
,→
Follow these steps:
1. Parse the provided context to identify key elements to investigate (file paths, function names,
class names, error messages, etc.)
,→
2. Navigate through the repository structure to locate relevant files and directories.
3. Examine and analyze the identified code elements including: - Key files and their purposes -
Important functions and their signatures - Classes and their methods/attributes - Module
dependencies and imports - Code relationships and call hierarchies
,→
,→
4. Map the structure and relationships between different code components
5. Provide structured information including: - File locations and their roles in the codebase -
Function/class definitions and their responsibilities - Dependencies between modules/components -
Code patterns and architectural insights - Relevant code snippets that relate to the context
,→
,→
**CRITICAL: When you finish your analysis, immediately call submit_subagent with a comprehensive
summary of your findings.**
,→
**CRITICAL: STAY IN YOUR LANE** - You are ONLY responsible for your specific assigned task - You are
NOT responsible for solving the entire issue - You are NOT responsible for other subagent tasks -
Focus EXCLUSIVELY on your assigned task and nothing else - Do not attempt to address unrelated
parts of the PR or perform work outside your specific subagent role
,→
,→
,→
Use submit_subagent to provide a clear and complete summary of your findings when finished.
A.2.2
ALL BOAD DISCOVERED SUB-AGENTS
Here we report all sub-agents discovered over 100 iterations of BOAD. For each sub-agent, we report
the iteration number where it was first proposed (Generated Iteration), the number of times it was
selected during optimization (n), and its final hindsight helpfulness rate.
Sub-agent
Generated Iteration
n
Helpfulness
code navigator
1
1140
0.933
test runner
1
120
0.625
code fixer
1
36
0.361
fix validator
2
36
0.333
issue reproducer
3
564
0.768
dependency resolver
5
24
0.125
test analyzer
6
24
0.083
issue analyzer
7
1116
0.982
precision editor
8
120
0.642
multi file coordinator
10
24
0.042
code detective
11
60
0.500
config manager
14
12
0.000
git resolver
26
12
0.000
error debugger
32
12
0.000
api analyzer
36
24
0.208
performance analyzer
46
36
0.250
compatibility checker
48
36
0.333
spec analyzer
53
36
0.361
data flow analyzer
60
96
0.562
refactor architect
96
24
0.042
Table 4: Sub-agent statistics sorted by exp num after 100 iterations of BOAD
22


Preprint
A.2.3
ALL EVOLUTION DISCOVERED SUB-AGENTS
Here we report all bundles discovered over 20 iterations of BOAD (one for each iteration). For each
sub-agent, we report its iteration number, the generated sub-agents, and the bundle’s success rate.
Note that sub-agents with the same name across different iterations may have different system/instance
templates because sub-agents are not reused. On evaluation, we choose the bundle with the highest
success rate (latest bundle if tied).
Sub-agents focused on problem analysis or file localization—such as issue analyzer (0.968
average helpfulness), code navigator (0.917), and issue reproducer (0.817)—consistently
appear more useful. Our observation is that these agents provide value independently of how later
stages unfold: even if code editing or testing fails, identifying the correct files and clarifying the
underlying issue is almost always beneficial.
In contrast, sub-agents whose usefulness depends on earlier steps tend to show lower average
helpfulness. For example, test analyzer (0.167) is only useful after the system has already
identified the faulty files and produced a candidate patch; if either prerequisite fails, it cannot
contribute, which naturally lowers its average helpfulness.
Specialized sub-agents such as dependency resolver (0.250) and config manager (0.000)
also have low average helpfulness, largely because dependency or configuration issues appear in only
a small fraction of tasks.
Finally, once core analysis is completed and the faulty files are correctly located, the orchestrator
can often complete the remaining code-editing steps on its own. This explains why code-editing
sub-agents like code fixer do not exhibit high average helpfulness.
Iteration
Sub-agents
Success Rate
1
issue localizer, issue reproducer, patch editor
0.333
2
fix validator, fix planner, code explorer
0.500
3
issue localizer, test runner, code patcher
0.417
4
repo mapper, code searcher, fix validator
0.500
5
code editor, issue reproducer, issue localizer
0.182
6
fix validator, code locator, problem analyzer
0.583
7
test runner, code editor, code analyzer
0.583
8
code locator, fix validator, issue reproducer
0.417
9
code editor, repo analyzer, test runner
0.250
10
code locator, issue reproducer, solution planner
0.417
11
code patcher, test validator, repo explorer
0.417
12
issue reproducer, code locator, fix implementer
0.364
13
fix validator, code analyzer, code editor
0.500
14
issue reproducer, code locator, bug analyzer
0.417
15
test validator, patch editor, repo explorer
0.500
16
code locator, issue reproducer, bug analyzer
0.455
17
test validator, patch editor, codebase explorer
0.583
18
issue reproducer, bug localizer, bug analyzer
0.250
19
code patcher, fix validator, issue analyzer
0.417
20
code locator, reproducer, code editor
0.417
Table 5: Sub-agents and success rates per iteration for the evolutionary baseline.
A.2.4
MANUALLY DESIGNED SUB-AGENT CONFIGURATIONS
issue localizer configuration
docstring: A subagent that localizes the issue in the repository. Takes a context string specifying the
brief description of the issue. Outputs a brief report about which files and lines are relevant to
the issue.
,→
,→
argument: context (string) [required] { A string containing the brief description of the issue.
instance template:
Issue description:
{{context}}
23


Preprint
Please identify which files and specific lines or functions are most relevant to this issue. Output a
short, clear report that mentions:
,→
- File paths
- Line numbers or function names
- A one-sentence explanation for why each location is relevant
Keep the report concise and focused on helping later agents work on the correct parts of the
repository.
,→
error reproducer configuration
docstring: A subagent that creates and executes test scripts to verify reported errors. Outputs the
result of the tests and locations of test files created.
,→
argument: context (string) [required] { A string containing error details, file paths and line numbers
of code relevant to the error, and expected vs actual behavior.
,→
instance template:
Error context:
{{context}}
Please create and execute a temporary reproduction script to verify this error. You should:
- Create temporary files (prefixed with 'tmp_')
- Include only what's needed to reproduce the error
- Report whether the error reproduces exactly as described
- Note any deviations from expected behavior
Output a short, clear report that mentions:
- Result of the tests
- Locations of test files created
code editor configuration
docstring: A subagent that implements specified code changes in the repository. Outputs the specific
code changes made, file paths/line numbers edited, and what should be tested to verify the fix.
,→
argument: context (string) [required] { A string containing the code snippet(s) to modify and file
path(s), and the changes to be applied.
,→
instance template:
Context for code changes:
{{context}}
Please implement the specified code changes in the repository. You should:
- Identify the relevant files and code sections
- Make precise edits according to the specification
- Maintain code quality and consistency
- Output a short, clear report that mentions:
- File paths/line numbers edited
- What should be tested to verify the fix
code tester configuration
docstring: A subagent that tests code after edits have been made to verify the fix works correctly.
Outputs the result of the tests.
,→
argument: context (string) [required] { A string containing the specific code changes made, file paths,
and original error.
,→
instance template:
Code changes made:
{{context}}
Please test the code after the edits to verify the fix works correctly. You should:
Use existing test files if available (prefixed with 'tmp_'), or create new ones as needed
- Test the specific functionality that was changed
- Determine whether or not the original error is fixed.
- Output a short, clear report that mentions:
- List of tests run and results of the tests
- Whether the original error is fixed, and if any new errors were introduced
24


Preprint
A.3
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A.3.1
EFFECT OF DESIGN-SET SIZE
We evaluated whether the size of the design set affects the performance of the discovered sub-agents
and found no meaningful impact. We sample 6 unique problems from SWE-Bench-Verified and
sample one problem from each to make a small design set of 6 problems, and sample two problems
from each to make a large design set of 24 problems. Across different design-set sizes, the resulting
sub-agents achieve similar performance as shown in Table 6.
Design Set Size
Resolution Rate
6
21%
12
20%
24
19%
Table 6: Performance of discovered sub-agents across different design-set sizes.
A.4
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL SETUP DETAILS
A.4.1
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS FOR EVOLUTIONARY BASELINE
For comparison with BOAD, we implemented an evolutionary multi-agent design baseline where the
orchestrator and three sub-agent prompts are bundled together and treated as a single evolutionary
individual. We use three sub-agents paired with an orchestrator because BOAD chooses three sub-
agents when optimizing the sub-agents in the experiments (Section 5.2). At each iteration of the
evolution, the system generates three new sub-agents sequentially, given the previous round sub-agent
configurations and their measured helpfulness and success rates (using the same prompts as BOAD,
provided in A.1.2). Next, both the sub-agent warm-up and the orchestrator construction follow the
same procedures used in BOAD. The generated orchestrator and sub-agents are then run on the same
design set to get the helpfulness and success rate for the next iteration.
A.4.2
API COST COMPARISON WITH BOAD
The evolutionary baseline also requires Claude calls—both to propose new orchestrator/sub-agent
prompts and to perform LLM-as-judge scoring. Under the same setup, each evolution iteration costs
$2.33, whereas each BOAD iteration costs $0.96, indicating that evolution is substantially more
expensive to run. Evolution incurs higher cost because it mutates the bundle of orchestrator and
sub-agents at each iteration.
B
THE USAGE OF LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS (LLMS)
In our work, we used large language models (LLMs) for two purposes: (1) as a general writing
assistant to check the grammar of the manuscript for readability, and (2) as the model component of
our proposed system BOAD, where LLMs function as the evolution engine, meta-/sub-agents, and
evaluation judges in experiments with mainstream coding agents. All research ideas, methodological
contributions, and conclusions are solely those of the authors, who take full responsibility for the
content of this work.
25