2026-01-14
MemGovern: Enhancing Code Agents through Learning from
Governed Human Experiences
Qihao Wang1*, Ziming Cheng2*, Shuo Zhang10*, Fan Liu3*,
Rui Xu4, Heng Lian5,10, Kunyi Wang6,10, Xiaoming Yu7, Jianghao Yin3, Sen Hu8,10, Yue Hu1,
Shaolei Zhang9†, Yanbing Liu1†, Ronghao Chen8,10†, Huacan Wang1,10†
1UCAS, 2NUS, 3ECNU, 4FDU, 5XDU, 6UBC, 7HKUST(GZ), 8PKU, 9RUC, 10QuantaAlpha
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Correspondence: zhangshaolei98@ruc.edu.cn, liuyanbing@iie.ac.cn, chenronghao@alumni.pku.edu.cn, wanghuacan17@mails.ucas.ac.cn
§ https://github.com/QuantaAlpha/MemGovern
Abstract
While autonomous software engineering (SWE) agents are reshaping programming
paradigms, they currently suffer from a “closed-world” limitation: they attempt to fix bugs
from scratch or solely using local context, ignoring the immense historical human experi-
ence available on platforms like GitHub. Accessing this open-world experience is hindered
by the unstructured and fragmented nature of real-world issue-tracking data. In this paper,
we introduce MemGovern, a framework designed to govern and transform raw GitHub data
into actionable experiential memory for agents. MemGovern employs experience gover-
nance to convert human experience into agent-friendly experience cards and introduces an
agentic experience search strategy that enables logic-driven retrieval of human expertise. By
producing 135K governed experience cards, MemGovern achieves a significant performance
boost, improving resolution rates on the SWE-bench Verified by 4.65%. As a plug-in ap-
proach, MemGovern provides a solution for agent-friendly memory infrastructure.
Claude-4-Sonnet
GPT5-Medium
DeepSeek-V3.1T
Qwen3-235B
Kimi-K2-Instruct
Qwen3-Coder-30B
GPT-4o
GPT-4o-Mini
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Score
66.6
65.0
62.8
47.2
43.8
48.0
23.2
14.0
69.8
67.4
65.8
55.4
51.8
51.4
32.6
17.2
SWE-Agent (Baseline)
MemGovern
SWE Agent vs MemGovern
Figure 1: Performance comparison of SWE-Agent(the base framework) and MemGovern across different LLM
backbones on SWE bench Verified.
1
arXiv:2601.06789v2  [cs.SE]  13 Jan 2026


1
Introduction
With the remarkable progress of large language models (LLMs) in code understanding and generation
(Chen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Rozière et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023), autonomous software
engineering agents (a.k.a, Code Agents) are reshaping the paradigm of programming (Hong et al., 2024;
Qian et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023). Among such tasks, autonomously fixing bugs in GitHub repositories
has emerged as a key benchmark for evaluating code agent capabilities and became a central research
focus (Jimenez et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2023).
In real-world software engineering practice, developers rarely fix bugs from scratch (Ko et al., 2006).
When confronted with complex issues, engineers typically search collaborative platforms such as GitHub
to examine how similar problems were addressed in the past (Sadowski et al., 2015; Xia et al., 2017).
These records on GitHub inherently encode expert debugging reasoning and repair patterns (Rahman and
Roy, 2014; Tian et al., 2018). Ideally, an advanced code agent should be able to exploit such open-world
experience like human developers, leveraging historical repair strategies to improve its reasoning depth
and accuracy when handling difficult bugs (Shinn et al., 2023).
Figure 2: Comparison of MemGovern with existing methods. MemGovern learns from human experience by
governing raw data into agent-friendly memories.
Although GitHub holds a vast repository of human experience, converting it into agent-friendly
knowledge remains challenging. First, raw issue and pull request discussions contain large amounts
of many unstructured and fragmented information, such as social exchanges and procedural communi-
cation, which often obscures technical insights (Kalliamvakou et al., 2014; Bird et al., 2009). Second,
variations in terminology, module organization, and coding styles across projects hinder the standardized
transfer of repair knowledge (Allamanis et al., 2018). Overall, cross-repository human issue experience
on GitHub is both noise-dense and highly heterogeneous, lacking an effective governance mechanism to
convert it into retrievable and verifiable knowledge representations. This limitation constitutes a primary
bottleneck that confines most approaches to within-repository retrieval (Jimenez et al., 2024).
To address these challenges, we propose MemGovern, a governance framework that transforms human
experience into agent-friendly experiential memory, thereby providing code agents with an experience
infrastructure. MemGovern aims to transform disorganized GitHub repair records into structured mem-
ories that can be efficiently exploited by agents (Park et al., 2023; Packer et al., 2023). MemGovern
introduces experience governance to automatically clean and standardize cross-repository experience,
organizing it into standardized experience cards that capture key dimensions such as modification strate-
gies and validation methods. Accordingly, MemGovern introduces agentic experience search, which
2


enables agents to interact with the experiential memory through multiple rounds of searching and brows-
ing, closely mirroring how human engineers explore prior cases (Singer et al., 2010). This design allows
agents to identify the underlying repair logic in similar examples rather than relying solely on shallow
semantic matching. Specifically, MemGovern is designed as a plug-and-play module that can be seam-
lessly integrated into existing agent scaffolds with minimal modifications. In our implementation, we
adopt the state-of-the-art SWE-Agent as the shared backbone. Our experimental results on the SWE-
bench demonstrate that MemGovern improves the ability of code agents to resolve real-world bugs by
4.65% on average, owing to 135k governed experience cards.
2
Related Work
Memory Construction for Agents. Building effective memory systems requires ensuring data quality
and standardization. Early approaches mined fix patterns from commits or patches (Pan et al., 2009;
Kim et al., 2013) but captured only syntactic transformations. Recent agent memory systems have ex-
plored structured experience organization. ExpeRepair (Mu et al., 2025) maintains dual memory banks
separating episodic demonstrations from semantic insights, while SWE-Exp (Chen et al., 2025) extracts
multi-level experiences from agent trajectories.
Code Agents. Recent advances in LLMs have driven autonomous code agents for automated software
engineering. SWE-agent (Yang et al., 2024b) pioneered Agent-Computer Interfaces with specialized
tools for LLM-based code navigation, while AutoCodeRover (Zhang et al., 2024) enhanced fault local-
ization through syntax tree representations and spectrum-based techniques. Agentless (Xia et al., 2025)
demonstrated that simpler pipeline approaches can match agent performance with lower costs. Training-
based methods have also emerged: SWE-Fixer (Xie et al., 2025) compiled 110K instances for fine-tuning
open-source repair models, BugPilot (Sonwane et al., 2025) generated synthetic bugs for efficient skill
learning, and Co-PatcheR (Tang et al., 2025) explored modular patching with component-specific mod-
els. Existing approaches largely operate within single repositories or rely on self-generated experiences,
overlooking the vast corpus of cross-repository human debugging expertise in GitHub’s collaborative
ecosystem.
In contrast, MemGovern addresses these limitations through comprehensive governance that curates
cross-repository human experiences from GitHub at scale. Our approach introduces multi-stage curation
to filter noisy discussions, content purification to standardize heterogeneous issue reports, and a dual-
layer protocol that separates retrieval signals from actionable repair logic, enabling effective learning
from the collective debugging knowledge embedded in real-world collaborative development.
3
MemGovern
In this paper, we propose MemGovern, a unified experience governance framework that transforms raw
human experiences into a standardized, agent-friendly experiential memory , thereby allowing agents to
learn from human experience in an effective and reliable manner. As illustrated in Figure 3, MemGovern
constructs a large collection of experience cards through experience governance and subsequently en-
ables efficient utilization of human experience via agentic experience search. The details are introduced
as follows.
3.1
Experience Governance
The efficacy of experience-driven learning hinges on the quality of the underlying data. While GitHub
offers a vast repository of debugging expertise, this open-world knowledge is inherently unstructured
and noisy. Historical records are often laden with social chatter, ambiguous process descriptions, and
non-standardized terminology, creating a "semantic gap" that hinders direct agentic retrieval. To bridge
this gap, MemGovern involves Experience Governance, a systematic pipeline that distills chaotic raw
data into structured, high-fidelity experience cards. This process prioritizes information density and
experience reliability through three stages: (1) Experience Selection, which filters low-signal noise at
both the repository and instance levels; (2) Standardization, which reconstructs raw data through a Uni-
fied repair-experience protocol; and (3) Quality Control, a checklist-based mechanism to ensure memory
3


Figure 3: Architecture of MemGovern. MemGovern selects raw human experiences from GitHub and standardizes
them into experience cards, enabling agents to utilize them through agentic experience search.
fidelity.
3.1.1
Hierarchical Experience Selection
The primary challenge in building a reliable experiential memory is the high quality variance, ranging
from unmaintained hobby projects to knowledge-dense issues. Integrating such low-signal data risks
memory pollution. To address this, MemGovern uses a two-tiered selection strategy that ensures both
source authority and instance completeness.
Repository Selection. To ensure the agent learns from active and high-quality software engineering
practices, MemGovern filters for repositories exhibiting sustained maintenance. MemGovern selects top-
M repositories based on a score that balances popularity (Stars Sr) with maintenance intensity (Issues
Ir and Pull Requests Pr):
Score(r) = λs log(1 + Sr) + λi log(1 + Ir) + λp log(1 + Pr),
(1)
where λs, λi, λp represent weights for stars, issues, and PRs respectively. This ensures the source data
reflects robust, active development flows.
Instance
Purification.
Within
selected
repositories,
MemGovern
rigorously
filters
(Issue, PR, Patch) triplets to retain only "closed-loop" repair records.
A valid instance must
provide a complete chain of evidence: explicit linkage between the issue and merged code, a parsable
diff, and diagnostic anchors (e.g., stack traces). Furthermore, to strip away social noise, MemGovern
analyzes the comment threads and discard instances where the technical-content ratio falls below a
threshold τ = 0.2, preserving only threads rich in debugging logic.
3.1.2
Experience Standardization
Raw GitHub discussion threads are inherently verbose, often interleaving failure symptoms with imple-
mentation details, social exchanges, and repository-specific context. Such entanglement obscures the
essential signals required for effective retrieval. To render these records actionable, MemGovern defines
a unified repair experience protocol and standardizes selected instances accordingly.
The core philosophy of this protocol is to explicitly decouple retrieval semantics from reasoning logic.
Concretely, MemGovern begins with content purification, where an LLM compresses the original com-
ment stream by removing non-technical interactions (e.g., greetings, merge notifications) and redundant
execution logs. The purified content is then reorganized into two functionally distinct layers within each
experience card: the Index Layer and the Resolution Layer.
Index Layer. This layer captures the information available at an agent’s initial observation stage and
serves as the primary retrieval interface. It includes a normalized Problem Summary and a set of gener-
alizable Diagnostic Signals (e.g., exception types, error signatures, component-level tags). Repository-
4


specific identifiers and incidental implementation details are intentionally removed to maximize semantic
matchability across heterogeneous repositories.
Resolution Layer. This layer encapsulates the transferable repair knowledge distilled from human
debugging processes. It contains the Root Cause analysis, an abstract Fix Strategy, and a concise Patch
Digest. By isolating causal reasoning and procedural patterns from concrete code artifacts, this layer
enables agents to reuse human repair logic beyond the original context. Formally, each standardized
experience card Ei is represented as:
Ei = ⟨Index = Ii, Resolution = Ri⟩.
(2)
where Ii denotes the index layer with retrievable failure symptoms, and Ri denotes the resolution layer
with reusable repair logic. This structural decoupling allows agents to retrieve experiences based on
symptom-level similarity encoded in the Index Layer, while executing repairs using abstract reasoning
strategies encoded in the Resolution Layer, thereby enabling effective cross-repository generalization.
3.1.3
Checklist-Based Quality Control
Automated extraction pipelines can occasionally hallucinate details or miss key nuances. To guarantee
the reliability of the memory bank, we introduce a checklist-based quality control mechanism that acts
as a final gatekeeper before ingestion.
We employ an LLM as a structured evaluator to score each generated experience card against critical
dimensions. Unlike simple filtering, this process incorporates a Refine Loop: if a card’s aggregate score
falls below a threshold γ, the evaluator provides targeted feedback on the deficient dimensions. The
extraction pipeline then regenerates only the problematic sections based on this feedback. This cycle
repeats for a maximum of three iterations, ensuring that only experiences passing this rigorous quality
gate are indexed. Consequently, MemGovern operates on a foundation of verifiable expert knowledge
rather than noisy raw data.
3.2
Experiential Memory Search
Constructing a high-quality experiential memory is only half the challenge; the agent must also be able to
retrieve and apply this experience effectively. Unlike standard Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG),
which relies on single-shot context injection, real-world debugging is a dynamic process of hypothesis
formulation and validation. To support this process, MemGovern adopts an agentic experience search
mechanism that mirrors how human engineers navigate technical documentation. Specifically, MemGov-
ern introduces a dual-primitive interface that enables agents to interact with a well-governed experiential
memory and complete complex coding tasks through progressively agentic search over stored experi-
ences.
3.2.1
Dual-Primitive Interface
To balance the need for broad semantic discovery with the cost of detailed context processing, MemGov-
ern exposes the experiential memory to agent through two primitives: Searching and Browsing.
Searching. The Searching tool serves as a high-throughput filter that enables the agent to scan the
memory index using a query. Given a task-specific query q, the tool traverses the index to identify
relevant experience cards. Retrieval is based on the Index Layer of each card, ensuring that matches are
driven by symptom-level similarity rather than implementation details. The relevance of an experience
card Ei is computed via cosine similarity in the embedding space:
sim(q, Ii) =
ϕ(q) · ϕ(Ii)
∥ϕ(q)∥∥ϕ(Ii)∥
(3)
where ϕ(·) is embedding function and Ii represents index layer of card Ei. The tool returns a ranked list
of candidates {(E(k), sim(q, I(k)))}K
k=1, allowing the agent to assess relevance before proceeding to a
deeper inspection.
Browsing. After promising candidates are identified, the Browsing tool grants access to the detailed
resolution layer of a selected card. It offers high-precision retrieval without overwhelming the agent with
5


Method
LLM
Resolved Rate (%)
∆(%)
Avg. Tokens (M)
Avg. Cost ($)
Other baselines
AutoCodeRover
GPT-4o
28.8
-
-
-
CodeAct
GPT-4o
30.0
-
-
-
SWESynInfer
GPT-4o
31.8
-
-
-
mini-SWE-agent
DeepSeek-V3.2-Reasoner
60.0
-
-
-
mini-SWE-agent
Claude-4-Opus
67.6
-
-
-
mini-SWE-agent
GPT-5.2
69.0
-
-
-
SWE-Agent vs. MemGovern across LLMs
SWE-Agent
Claude-4-Sonnet
66.6
-
2.29
6.94
MemGovern
69.8
+3.2
2.35
7.27
SWE-Agent
GPT5-Medium
65.0
-
0.78
1.14
MemGovern
67.4
+2.4
0.91
1.33
SWE-Agent
DeepSeek-V3.1T
62.8
-
0.89
0.18
MemGovern
65.8
+3.0
0.95
0.19
SWE-Agent
Qwen3-235B
47.2
-
1.17
0.09
MemGovern
55.4
+8.2
1.42
0.10
SWE-Agent
Kimi-K2-Instruct
43.8
-
0.57
0.26
MemGovern
51.8
+8.0
1.14
0.53
SWE-Agent
Qwen3-Coder-30B
48.0
-
0.92
0.07
MemGovern
51.4
+3.4
0.99
0.07
SWE-Agent
GPT-4o
23.2
-
0.73
1.38
MemGovern
32.6
+9.4
0.97
1.84
SWE-Agent
GPT-4o-Mini
14.0
-
0.99
0.14
MemGovern
17.2
+3.2
1.37
0.20
Table 1: Comparisons with prior agents. ∆is computed against SWE-Agent under the same backbone.
raw details. This design ensures that once a relevant case is identified, the agent receives a clear blueprint
of what changed and why, enabling direct transfer of human expertise to the agent.
3.2.2
Progressive Agentic Search
Building upon these primitives, we introduce a progressive agentic search mechanism that adapts dy-
namically to the evolving problem-solving state. Unlike conventional approaches that follow a rigid,
predefined pipeline, the agent continuously reassesses its informational needs and autonomously choos-
ing searching and browsing actions.
Query Formulation and Retrieval. The process begins with problem representation. The agent ana-
lyzes the current issue to extract diagnostic keywords, such as failure symptoms, failing test names, stack
traces, and relevant module identifiers, to construct an initial query Q. It then invokes the Searchings
tool to retrieve semantically related candidates. Rather than indiscriminately consuming all results, the
agent autonomously assesses the returned metadata and selects the most promising subset for deeper
inspection. When the returned candidates are not sufficiently relevant, the agent can revise the query
by incorporating additional observed symptoms and re-invoke Searching, enabling multi-round retrieval
without prematurely committing to noisy details.
Selective Browsing and Analogical Transfer.
For the selected candidates, the agent employs the
Browsing tool to access their resolution layers. The core challenge here is analogical transfer: the
agent must map the historical solution to the current repository’s context. By synthesizing the browsed
evidence, the agent induces a transfer triplet: Root Cause Pattern →Modification Logic →Validation
Strategy. For instance, if a retrieved experience suggests "adding a boundary check for null inputs in
the parser", the agent maps this abstract strategy to the specific variable names and API versions of the
current codebase. This results in a concrete, actionable repair plan involving specific file locations and
code edits. Totally, progressive agentic search enables the agent to autonomously and deeply acquire and
exploit experiential memory.
6


Figure 4: Results of MemGovern under various experiential
memory size and MemGovern under various retrieval sizes.
LLM
Strategy
Exp Resolved
Rate
∆
DeepSeek-
V3.1-T
Base Agent
×
62.8
-
w/ RAG
✓
64.4
+1.6
w/ Ag. RAG
✓
63.4
+0.6
w/ Ag. Search
✓
65.8
+3.0
Qwen3-
Coder
Base Agent
×
48.0
-
w/ RAG
✓
46.8
-1.2
w/ Ag. RAG
✓
48.6
+0.6
w/ Ag. Search
✓
51.4
+3.4
GPT-4o
Base Agent
×
23.2
-
w/ RAG
✓
31.2
+8.0
w/ Ag. RAG
✓
31.2
+8.0
w/ Ag. Search
✓
32.6
+9.4
Table 2: Comparison of experience usage strate-
gies. “Exp” denotes experiential memory. “Ag.”
denotes “Agentic”.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
We evaluate our method on SWE-bench Verified. For a comprehensive and fair evaluation, we compare
MemGovern against SWE-Agent and several strong baselines. Due to space limitations, we provide a
detailed introduction to the benchmark and baselines in Appendix A.
4.2
Configuration
During the bug-fix experience governance process, we collected active, well-maintained open-source
repositories from GitHub with more than 100 stars. After verification and data cleaning, we obtained
approximately 150K Issue–PR–Patch triplets. These triplets were then processed by our experience gov-
ernance pipeline using GPT-5.1 (medium reasoning), as described in Section 3.1. After de-duplication,
the final experience card collection contains 135K items.
Building on the SWE-Agent framework, we implemented two tools: an Experience Search tool and
an Experience Browse tool. Both tools are integrated into SWE-Agent’s default toolset, together with
the anthropic style code editor and patch submission module. The Experience Search tool takes a search
query and a hyperparameter, top-k, which controls the number of experience-card previews returned
(default by 10 to balance context length and information gain). The Experience Browse tool takes the
unique index of an experience card and returns the full bug-fix experience.
4.3
Main Results
Table 1 presents the main results on SWE-bench Verified, comparing MemGovern with the SWE-Agent
baseline across seven LLMs. MemGovern consistently outperforms the baseline across all models,
demonstrating robust and model-agnostic improvements. The gains are especially pronounced for mod-
els with weaker initial performance, while even the stronger models benefit noticeably, highlighting
MemGovern’s ability to enhance task-solving capabilities across a diverse range of LLMs. Although
MemGovern introduces some additional token overhead due to its memory mechanism, this cost is out-
weighed by the average performance improvement of around 4.65%, making it a highly acceptable trade-
off.
5
Analysis
5.1
Ablation of Experience Governance
To study the effectiveness of experience governance in MemGovern, we conduct ablation studies on two
fundamental characteristics of governed experience: size and quality.
7


Figure 5: Comparison of using raw unprocessed experience and MemGovern’s experience.
Effect of Experiential Memory Size. MemGovern adopts an experience-driven agentic framework
with a governed experiential memory. To verify whether MemGovern’s performance gains stem from
broader coverage of governed human experience, we evaluate the MemGovern under various experiential
memory size. Specifically, as shown in Figure 4, we evaluate MemGovern under 10%-100% of the full
experiential memory (135K experience cards). The results show that enlarging the experiential memory
steadily improves task resolution performance across LLMs. This improvement can be attributed to a
higher probability of retrieving relevant and transferable experience cards when the memory coverage
increases. Importantly, the gains are monotonic rather than abrupt, indicating that MemGovern does not
rely on a small subset of exceptional examples but instead benefits cumulatively from diverse, governed
experiences. Overall, MemGovern effectively leverages large-scale experience aggregation, validating
the necessity of constructing a sizable experiential memory through systematic governance.
Effect of Experiential Memory Quality. MemGovern further incorporates Experience Standardiza-
tion and Quality Control to ensure that the experiential memory is not only large but also reliable and
agent-friendly. To assess whether the observed gains truly arise from governed experience representa-
tions rather than raw historical data, we conduct an analysis experiment that ablates the quality of the
experiential memory . Concretely, as reported in Figure 5 we compare MemGovern using the same
experiential memory size but different memory contents: (i) raw PR+Patch records without standardiza-
tion or quality filtering, and (ii) fully governed experience cards constructed by MemGovern through the
governance pipeline (see Section 3.1). The results indicate that while raw records can occasionally pro-
vide partial benefits, their effectiveness is unstable and model-dependent, likely due to noise, verbosity,
and weak alignment with agent retrieval semantics. In contrast, governed experience cards consistently
yield stronger and more stable improvements across models. These findings show that MemGovern’s
improvements are driven by experience governance rather than sheer data exposure, and they empirically
validate the effectiveness of standardization and quality control in constructing a high-fidelity experien-
tial memory .
5.2
Superiority of Agentic Search
MemGovern adopts an agentic experience search mechanism based on a dual-primitive interface. To
verify that MemGovern’s performance gains stem from the proposed agentic search paradigm rather than
from naive experience injection, we compare different experience utilization strategies. Specifically, as
shown in Table 2, we evaluate three variants under the same experiential memory : (i) RAG, which
performs a single retrieval before the repair process and directly injects all retrieved experiences into the
context; (ii) Agentic RAG, which allows retrieval to be triggered adaptively during iterative debugging
but still follows a retrieve-and-inject paradigm; and (iii) Agentic Search, which decouples candidate
discovery from evidence usage by first retrieving a broader candidate set and then selectively browsing
and transferring only relevant experience cards.
The results show that Agentic Search consistently outperforms both static and adaptive RAG variants
across diverse backbone models, including DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus, Qwen3-Coder-30B, and GPT-4o.
This improvement is not merely a result of accessing a larger pool of experiences, but stems from the
8


Star only
Issue only
Pull Request only
Our method
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Effective Experience Rate (%)
61%
59%
73%
78%
Baseline
Our method
Figure 6: Action composition of the agent across different experience
settings. We report the fraction of steps spent on code editing versus
other actions.
Figure 7: Human evaluation of repos-
itory selection.
Proportion of issues
judged reusable as transferable experi-
ence across different ranking rules.
agent’s strategic management of searching depth and breadth. By decoupling searching breadth (broad
candidate discovery) from browsing depth (selective evidence grounding and logic extraction), the agent
can explore a wide range of candidate experiences without being overwhelmed by irrelevant information,
while simultaneously diving deeply into the most promising ones leads to extract actionable insights.
This allows reasoning over multiple experiences in a structured and iterative manner, ensuring that only
contextually relevant knowledge is integrated with the current debugging state. In contrast, both RAG
variants tend to conflate breadth with depth, making them highly sensitive to noise: weakly related
experiences are injected directly into the context, often disrupting the generation process. Overall, our
proposed agentic experience search is highly effective, enabling principled exploration of broad and deep
experience spaces essential for complex software debugging.
5.3
Effect of Various Retrieval Sizes
Furthermore, to study how the number of retrieved candidates affects performance, we conduct a abla-
tion study on the retrieval Top-K parameter in the agentic search pipeline. Specifically, as reported in
Figure 4, we show The performance of MemGovern under various Top-K retrieved candidates.
The results reveal a clear and consistent trend across different backbone models. When Top-K is
small, increasing the retrieval size leads to steady performance improvements, indicating that a larger
candidate pool increases the likelihood of surfacing actionable and relevant experiences. However, be-
yond a moderate value of K, the gains gradually diminish and eventually plateau.This behavior aligns
well with the design of agentic experience search. At small K, retrieval coverage is the primary bottle-
neck, and expanding the candidate set helps the agent discover useful analogies. Once sufficient coverage
is achieved, further enlarging the candidate pool yields limited benefits, as the agent already has access
to representative experience patterns and additional candidates tend to be redundant. Importantly, perfor-
mance does not degrade at larger K, which suggests that the selective browsing mechanism effectively
filters out irrelevant experiences and prevents context overload. Therefore, MemGovern is robust to the
choice of retrieval size and that a moderate Top-K achieves a favorable balance between effectiveness
and efficiency. These findings further support the effectiveness of the decoupled retrieval-and-browsing
design, showing that agentic search can safely leverage broader retrieval without sacrificing reliability.
5.4
Effect of Repository Selection
To validate our repository selection strategy, we conduct a human evaluation on 100 randomly sampled
GitHub repositories with Sr ≥100 and similar Issue volumes. We then construct four Top-10 subsets
ranked by Star only, Issue only, Pull Request only, and Our method (Section 3.1.1). Two experienced
software engineers then assess whether issues in each subset can be distilled into transferable, reusable
experiences. As shown in Figure 7, our method yields the highest proportion of issues deemed reusable
as experience, suggesting that combining popularity and maintenance signals selects repositories with
denser, higher-quality experience candidates and strengthens the memory.
9


Figure 8: Comparison of Agent behavior without experience (Top) vs. with MemGovern’s experiential memory
(Bottom). While the baseline applies a defensive bypass that violates the API contract, MemGovern leverages
historical logic to implement a semantically correct fix.
5.5
Can Agent Learn from Experience?
We further analyze agent behaviors by quantifying the proportion of each operation category (Figure 6).
The results indicate that MemGovern improves both success rate and efficiency by reducing unguided
exploration and encourages effective self-testing.
Specifically, Info Gathering drops from 15.0% to 11.3% under MemGovern, indicating that experience
cards offer targeted navigational guidance and reduce extensive repository exploration. This improve-
ment aligns with a more balanced editing–execution strategy: the baseline agent often edits prematurely
before adequately reproducing or localizing faults (Code Editing: 40.9%; Code Execution: 19.6%), rais-
ing the risk of faulty fixes. With MemGovern, the agent shifts focus toward self-testing (Code Execution:
22.3%) and curtails unnecessary edits (Code Editing: 33.3%) by leveraging root-cause and verification
cues from experience cards, resulting in more reliable repairs.
Besides, although Raw Experience (unprocessed GitHub PR and patches) provides useful cues, it
incurs a substantially higher verification overhead (35.4% Code Execution), revealing that unrefined ex-
perience introduce noise and lead to low-quality fix. MemGovern mitigates this issue through knowledge
governance, maintaining effective information while compressing irrelevant contexts.
10


5.6
Case Study
To provide a qualitative understanding of how MemGovern enhances autonomous software engineering,
we examine how the presence of experience enables the agent to move beyond superficial fixes to robust
solutions.
Figure 8 illustrates a case involving a crash in Django’s order_by() function when Meta.ordering
contains query expressions.
Without Experience (Baseline). The baseline agent, lacking historical context, relies on a “Mechan-
ical Diagnosis.” It traces the indexing error in the stack trace and attempts to fix the crash by blindly
enumerating input types. This results in a “Defensive Bypass” patch: it applies a superficial type check
(if not isinstance(field, str)) to return the raw object. While this suppresses the immediate crash,
it violates the expected return contract of the function, potentially causing silent failures downstream.
With Experience (MemGovern). MemGovern retrieves a relevant experience card and leverages
its structured Resolution Layer to guide the repair. Specifically, the Root Cause field informs the
agent that “OrderBy expressions were accepted... without explicit validation”, while the Fix Strategy
provides a clear directive to “add explicit type checking” rather than bypassing the object. Leverag-
ing these governed insights, MemGovern implements a semantic-aware fix that extracts the field name
(field.expression.name), thereby preserving the API contract. This demonstrates how MemGov-
ern’s structured schema—decoupling diagnostic signals from actionable resolution logic—provides the
precise reasoning necessary to distinguish between a superficial symptom-fix and a correct repair.
We provide further analysis on the superiority of agentic search and the necessity of experience gov-
ernance in Appendix B.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose MemGovern, a framework for governing raw GitHub data into agent-friendly
experiential memory, along with a corresponding agentic experience search method that provides mem-
ory infrastructure for agents. MemGovern constructs 135k experience cards, and improves 4.65% reso-
lution rates on the SWE-bench, demonstrating its superior performance.
Limitations
MemGovern is an agent-friendly memory infrastructure that enables agents to better learn from human
experiences, thereby achieving improved performance. A limitation of MemGovern lies in the additional
tokens generated when searching the memory during agent execution. Inevitably, the agent processes
more tokens during searching in exchange for higher resolution rates. Overall, considering that Mem-
Govern achieves an average 4.65% improvement in resolution rates compared to SWE-Agent, we believe
the slightly higher token consumption is acceptable. Strategies for compressing memory length will be
explored in future work.
11


References
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo
Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, and 1 others. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774.
Miltiadis Allamanis, Earl T Barr, Premkumar Devanbu, and Charles Sutton. 2018. A survey of machine learning
for big code and naturalness. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(4):1–37.
Christian Bird, Adrian Bachmann, Eirini Aune, John Duffy, Premkumar Devanbu, Vladimir Filkov, and David Lo.
2009. Fair and balanced? bias in bug-fix datasets. In Proceedings of the 7th Joint Meeting of the European Soft-
ware Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering,
pages 121–130.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, HPea Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda,
Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, and 1 others. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.03374.
Silin Chen, Shaoxin Lin, Xiaodong Gu, Yuling Shi, Heng Lian, Longfei Yun, Dong Chen, Weiguo Sun, Lin
Cao, and Qianxiang Wang. 2025.
Swe-exp: Experience-driven software issue resolution.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.23361.
Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Zhiyong Wang, Steven K Yau, Zijuan
Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, and 1 others. 2024. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative
framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press.
2024. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR).
Eirini Kalliamvakou, Georgios Gousios, Kelly Blincoe, Leif Singer, Daniel M German, and Daniela Damian. 2014.
The promises and perils of mining github. In Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software
Repositories (MSR), pages 92–101.
Dongsun Kim, Jaechang Nam, Jaewoo Song, and Sunghun Kim. 2013. Automatic patch generation learned from
human-written patches. In 2013 35th international conference on software engineering (ICSE), pages 802–811.
IEEE.
Andrew J Ko, Brad A Myers, and Htet Htet Aung. 2006. Exploratory software development. In Proceedings of
the 28th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 431–440.
Elizabeth Lawler. 2024. Appmap speedruns to the top of the swe bench leaderboard. https://appmap.io/blog/
2024/06/20/appmap-navie-swe-bench-leader/.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Marc Marone,
Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, and 1 others. 2023. Starcoder: may the source be with you!
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.06161.
Tianyang Liu, Can Xu, and Julian McAuley. 2023.
Repobench: Benchmarking repository-level code auto-
completion systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03091.
Weijie Lv, Xuan Xia, and Sheng-Jun Huang. 2024. Codeact: Code adaptive compute-efficient tuning framework
for code llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02193.
Yingwei Ma, Rongyu Cao, Yongchang Cao, Yue Zhang, Jue Chen, Yibo Liu, Yuchen Liu, Binhua Li, Fei Huang,
and Yongbin Li. 2024. Lingma swe-gpt: An open development-process-centric language model for automated
software improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00622.
Fangwen Mu, Junjie Wang, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Shoubin Li, and Qing Wang. 2025. Experepair: Dual-memory
enhanced llm-based repository-level program repair. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10484.
Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph E Gonzalez. 2023. Memgpt:
Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560.
Kai Pan, Sunghun Kim, and E James Whitehead Jr. 2009. Toward an understanding of bug fix patterns. Empirical
Software Engineering, 14(3):286–315.
12


Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein.
2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pages 1–22.
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Wei Yang, Weize Liu, Yungeng Dang, Juyuan Li, Jiacheng Xu, Dahua Li, Zhiyuan
Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2023. Chatdev: Communicative agents for software development. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.07924.
Md Masudur Rahman and Chanchal K Roy. 2014. Insight into the pull request development model of github. In
Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR).
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu
Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, and 1 others. 2023. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.12950.
Caitlin Sadowski, Kathryn T Stolee, and Sebastian Elbaum. 2015. How developers search for code: a case study.
In Proceedings of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE), pages
191–201.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: lan-
guage agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36
(NeurIPS 2023).
Leif Singer, Timothy Lethbridge, Norman Vinson, and Nicolas Anquetil. 2010. Software engineering at the speed
of light: how developers search for code. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Cooperative and
Human Aspects of Software Engineering, pages 84–87.
Atharv Sonwane, Isadora White, Hyunji Lee, Matheus Pereira, Lucas Caccia, Minseon Kim, Zhengyan Shi, Chin-
may Singh, Alessandro Sordoni, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and 1 others. 2025. Bugpilot: Complex bug generation
for efficient learning of swe skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19898.
Yuheng Tang, Hongwei Li, Kaijie Zhu, Michael Yang, Yangruibo Ding, and Wenbo Guo. 2025.
Co-
patcher: Collaborative software patching with component (s)-specific small reasoning models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.18955.
Ke Tian, Bo Jiang, and WK Chan. 2018. Learning to represent programs with graphs. In International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyuan Zhang, Shaokun
Zhang, Jiane Liu, and 1 others. 2023. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications with multi-agent conversa-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155.
Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. 2025. Demystifying llm-based software
engineering agents. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, 2(FSE):801–824.
Xin Xia, Lingfeng Bao, David Lo, Zhenchang Xing, Ahmed E Hassan, and Shanping Li. 2017. Measuring pro-
gram comprehension: A large-scale field study with professionals. In Proceedings of the 39th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 117–128.
Chengxing Xie, Bowen Li, Chang Gao, He Du, Wai Lam, Difan Zou, and Kai Chen. 2025. Swe-fixer: Training
open-source llms for effective and efficient github issue resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05040.
John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir
Press. 2024a.
SWE-agent:
Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.
CoRR,
abs/2405.15793.
John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press.
2024b. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652.
John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir
Press. 2024c.
Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.
Preprint,
arXiv:2405.15793.
Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. Autocoderover: Autonomous pro-
gram improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis, pages 1592–1604.
13


A
Experimental Setup
Benchmark. We evaluate our method on SWE-bench Verified, a high-quality subset of SWE-bench
containing 500 real-world GitHub issues, focused on functional bug fixing in a controlled, self-contained
setup. For each instance, the model is given only the natural-language issue description and the corre-
sponding repository. Correctness is assessed by running developer-written unit tests against the generated
patch, providing a consistent and rigorous evaluation of automated bug-fixing performance.
Baselines. For a comprehensive and fair evaluation, we compare MemGovern against SWE-Agent
and several strong baselines including SWE-Agent (Yang et al., 2024c), AppMap Navie (Lawler,
2024), AutoCodeRover (Zhang et al., 2024), CodeAct (Lv et al., 2024) and SWESynInfer (Ma et al.,
2024). The comparison is conducted across multiple LLM backbones, covering both open and propri-
etary paradigms. Specifically, we evaluate four leading open-source models(DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus,
Qwen3-Coder-30B, Kimi-K2-Instruct, and Qwen3-235B) as well as five closed-source models(GPT-4o,
GPT-4o mini, Claude Sonnet 4, GPT-5, and Gemini 3 Pro). Notably, MemGovern is implemented as a
plug-and-play module that can be integrated into existing agent scaffolds with minimal changes; unless
otherwise stated, we adopt SWE-Agent as the shared backbone for subsequent experiments.
B
Additional Case Study Analysis
Following the case study in Section 5.6, we present two additional comparisons to highlight different
aspects of MemGovern’s performance: the superiority of agentic search over static retrieval, and the
necessity of experience governance.
B.1
Superiority of Agentic Experience Search
Standard RAG often suffers from semantic drift, where retrieved documents share surface keywords but
differ in technical substance. Figure 9 compares MemGovern’s Agentic Search against a Standard RAG
baseline on a Django issue where number_format renders small decimals in scientific notation.
Standard RAG. As defined in our comparisons, the RAG baseline performs a single retrieval before
the repair process and directly injects all retrieved experiences into the context. In this case, the retrieval
is driven by surface similarity with the query “django numberformat decimal_pos,” fetching irrelevant
experiences related to frontend CSS alignment (e.g., “text-align: right”) or locale-based separators. In-
fluenced by this noise, the agent attempts a fix that aggressively mutates the number sign (abs(number))
early in the function, introducing a “Defensive Bypass” that breaks sign handling for other numeric types.
Agentic Search (MemGovern). In contrast, MemGovern employs a Search-then-Browse workflow.
The agent first retrieves candidates and then uses the Browsing tool to inspect the logic. It successfully
identifies a relevant case regarding “scientific notation cutoff” and rejects irrelevant frontend issues. By
transferring the specific logic found in the experience—adding a threshold check, MemGovern produces
a precise fix that resolves the issue without side effects. This highlights that the ability to iteratively
browse and verify experience is crucial for filtering retrieval noise.
B.2
Necessity of Experience Governance
Finally, we analyze the importance of governing raw data into structured memory. Figure 10 depicts a
complex issue involving HttpResponse handling memoryview objects from PostgreSQL.
Raw PR+Patch Records. When provided with raw PR+Patch records without standardization or
quality filtering (Left), the agent is overwhelmed by noise. The retrieved raw data contains extraneous
information about BaseHandler and make_bytes that is not central to the specific memoryview edge
case. Confused by the verbose diffs and social commentary, the agent misclassifies the issue as a generic
iterable problem. It produces a patch that intercepts memoryview but fails to handle bytearray correctly,
causing the code to fall through to a generic loop that crashes when iterating over bytes.
Governed Experience Cards (MemGovern). MemGovern (Right) utilizes fully governed experience
cards where noise has been stripped via Content Purification. The Resolution Layer clearly highlights the
specific fix strategy: “Handle memoryview and bytearray objects.” Freed from the distraction of unre-
lated code changes in the original PR, the agent focuses on the core logic. It implements a focused patch
14


utils.numberformat.format renders small decimals in 
exponential notation.
Description
When using utils.number_format with decimal_pos, 
extremely small numbers get displayed using exponential 
notation.
>>> from django.utils.numberformat import format as 
nformat
>>> nformat(Decimal('1e-199'), '.', decimal_pos=2)
'0.00'
This is caused by a hardcoded cut-off point in the internal 
logic, but I would argue that when a decimal_pos argument is 
supplied 
Problem Statement
Think:I can see the issue now. The problem is in lines 32-33.Let me 
search for any existing experiences that may help.
Action: Search: 'django numberformat decimal_pos scientific notation’ 
cutoff'
Step10
Think: Let me read some of these relevant experiences 
Action: Browse ‘COVID19Tracking/website598329388’
Step11
Think: Let me read a few more relevant experiences to understand the 
pattern
Action: Browse  ‘PHPOffice/PhpSpreadsheet503433048’
Step51
Root Cause: Implicit conversion using str(float_or_decimal) defaults 
to scientific notation (e.g., 1e-07) when value < 1e-6.Fix 
Strategy: Bypass default string conversion. Use Python's string 
formatting with fixed precision to force decimal representation.
Patch Digest: - return str(value)+ return "{:.{}f}".format(value, 
decimal_pos)
Verification: Verified 1e-10 formats to "0.000000" instead of "1e-10".
Fix Experience
Think: Let me read some of these relevant experiences 
Action: Browse ‘simpledotorg/simple-server735615882’
Step12
[1] COVID19Tracking/website598329388: Tiny values shown in 
scientific notation, not rounded
[2] simpledotorg/simple-server735615882: Small decimals rendered 
as scientific, not zero
……
[7] PHPOffice/PhpSpreadsheet503433048: Small values scientifically 
displayed, not rounded
…….
[10] project-koku/koku-ui521718307: Uniform format causes 
scientific display of tiny values
Fix Experience
Root Cause: The Decimal object retains its internal exponent/precision, 
which format() uses even if it contradicts the target display precision.
Fix Strategy: Explicitly quantize() the Decimal object to the target 
precision before converting to string.
Patch Digest: + number = number.quantize(Decimal("0."+"0"*p))
Verification: Decimal internal exponent is reset, forcing standard 
notation output.
Step24
Think:I need to configure Django settings first.
Action: str_replace_editor str_replace /testbed/reproduce_issue.py   
--old_str
Step7
………
Root Cause: Formatter lacks a lower-bound check; it tries to format 
numbers smaller than the requested decimal_pos resolution.
Fix Strategy: Add a threshold check. If abs(value) < 10**(-
decimal_pos), fast-path return a zero string (e.g., "0.00").
Patch Digest: + if abs(number) < cutoff: return "0." + "0"*decimals
Verification: Inputs like 1e-200 with decimal_pos=2 correctly yield 
"0.00".
Fix Experience
Experience by Agentic Search
Experience Analysis: Leveraging experience to extract semantics preserves 
the API contract.
Think: Now let's search for similar bug fix experiences to understand 
how this type of issue has been handled before:
Action: Search 'django numberformat decimal_pos scientific notation’ 
cutoff'
Step4
[1]
Root Cause: Numeric columns in the HTML table are hard to read 
because they are left-aligned by default.
Fix Strategy: Apply CSS class text-align: right and use monospaced 
fonts for number cells in the template.
Patch Digest: - <td>{{ value }}</td>+ <td class="text-right font-
mono">{{ value }}</td>
Verification: Visual inspection confirms decimals align vertically in the 
browser.
[2]
Fix Experience Root Cause: Users in Europe see "1.000,00" format 
while US users see "1,000.00", but the separator is hardcoded.Fix 
Strategy: Refactor get_format() to read the USE_L10N flag and 
load separators from the user's locale config file.Patch Digest: - 
separator = "."+ separator = 
get_user_locale().decimal_pointVerification: Switching user language 
settings updates the separator symbol.
Experience 2.3 (Focus: Excel/CSV Export)
[3]
Fix Experience Root Cause: When exporting data to CSV, Excel 
interprets values like "00123" as numbers and strips leading zeros.
Fix Strategy: Force the export library to treat the cell as "Text" 
format or prepend a hidden character.
Patch Digest: - writer.writerow([value])+ writer.writerow(["='" + value 
+ “’”])
Verification: Opened CSV in Excel; leading zeros are preserved.
Fix Experience
Experience Analysis: The retrieval process relied on semantic similarity, 
which conflated general "display" concepts with specific code logic. 
Consequently, it fetched experiences related to CSS text alignment and 
locale-based separators (e.g., European formats). While these results share 
keywords like "formatting" with the query, they address frontend 
presentation layers and fail to provide insight into the backend Python logic 
causing the scientific notation error.
Think: Now let's look for the numberformat module in the Django utils 
directory:
Action: str_replace_editor view /testbed/django/utils
Step2
Experience by RAG
………
Figure 9: Comparison of Standard RAG (Top) vs. MemGovern’s Agentic Search (Bottom). RAG retrieves irrele-
vant frontend formatting experiences due to surface similarity. MemGovern’s agentic workflow allows it to browse
and locate the specific backend logic for handling scientific notation thresholds.
that explicitly converts both memoryview and bytearray to raw bytes, ensuring correct serialization.
This confirms that experience governance is essential to convert noisy open-source data into actionable,
agent-friendly memory.
C
Experience Card Schema
A detailed explanation of MemGovern’s Experience Card Schema is described in Fig 11.
15


Fix Experience
Root Cause: OrderBy expressions were accepted and propagated 
without explicit validation of their expected structure and return type.
Fix Strategy: Add explicit type checking for OrderBy expressions.
Patch Digest: diff --git a/query/query.py b/query/query.py
Verification: Confirmed invalid expressions are rejected early with a 
deterministic, descriptive error.
--- a/django/http/response.py
+++ b/django/http/response.py
if isinstance(value, bytes):
             return bytes(value)
         if isinstance(value, str):
             return bytes(value.encode(self.charset))
+            return bytes(value)
 def content(self, value):
         # Consume iterators upon assignment to allow repeated iteration.
- if hasattr(value, '__iter__') and not isinstance(value, (bytes, str)):
- +        if isinstance(value, memoryview):memoryview, bytearray)):
+        elif hasattr(value, '__iter__') and not isinstance(value, (bytes, str)):             
W/ Experience not processed
Think: It seems `array.array` is not commonly used in Django core. Let me 
focus on the specific issue: handling `memoryview
Action: "str_replace_editor str_replace /testbed/django/http/response.py   
--old_str '    def make_bytes(self, value):\n        \"\"\"Turn a value into a 
bytestring encoded in the output charset.\"
Step49
………
--- a/django/http/response.py
+++ b/django/http/response.py
return bytes(value.encode(self.charset))
+        # Handle memoryview and bytearray objects
+        if isinstance(value, (memoryview, bytearray)):
+            return bytes(value)
 def content(self, value):
         # Consume iterators upon assignment to allow repeated 
iteration.
-        if hasattr(value, '__iter__') and not isinstance(value, (bytes, 
str)):
+        if hasattr(value, '__iter__') and not isinstance(value, (bytes, 
str, memoryview, bytearray)):
Think: ere's the files and directories up to 2 levels deep in /testbed/
Action: str_replace_editor view /testbed/django/http
………
………
………
………
W/ Experience Processed
………
Patch Analysis: This patch is incomplete as it only intercepts memoryview in the 
setter but overlooks bytearray. Since bytearray is iterable, it erroneously falls 
through to the b''.join(...) loop, causing a TypeError (or crash) by attempting to 
iterate over integers instead of bytes.
Analysis: memoryview falls into the generic branch and becomes 
str(value).encode(...), producing b'<memory at 0x...>' instead of the 
underlying bytes.
Patch Analysis: This patch fixes the bug by converting 
memoryview/bytearray to raw bytes in make_bytes(), preventing the 
fallback str(value).encode(...) that produces b'<memory at ...>'.
Analysis: it patches the obvious memoryview -> "<memory at ...>" stringification bug 
only on the scalar conversion path, but leaves the higher-level content setter’s 
iterable detection untouched
Analysis: Iterable Misclassification Bug, it fixes the bug where bytearray is 
treated as an iterator of ints, each int is stringified and encoded, and the response 
becomes a concatenated digit stream (e.g., b'7712132...') instead of the original 
bytes payload.
Analysis: This is a small, focused change that matches the expected 
behavior for bytes-like objects and fixes the PostgreSQL memoryview 
case without affecting normal str/bytes handling.
Think: let me look at the `make_bytes` method and `content` setter since 
those are likely involved in handling the content
Action: str_replace_editor view /testbed/django/http/response.py  --
view_range 223 342result = get_order_dir(OrderBy(F('name')))
Step14
Think: ere's the files and directories up to 2 levels deep in /testbed/
Action: str_replace_editor view /testbed/django/http
Step2
Patch
Step2
Think: The `make_bytes` method needs to handle `memoryview` 
objects specifically. When a `memoryview` object is passed, it should 
be converted to bytes
Action: "str_replace_editor str_replace 
/testbed/django/http/response.py   --old_str ' if isinstance(value, 
(memoryview, bytearray)):
Step24
Patch
Think: Let me look at the `make_bytes` method and the content 
setter in more detail, as these are likely where the issue with 
`memoryview
Action: "str_replace_editor view /testbed/django/http/response.py  -
-view_range 223 238
Step5
Step28
Fix Experience Without Processing
PR Body:
This is my attempt to fix https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/26052 
during the djangocon europe sprints. :saxophone: 
Patch: 
 class BaseHandler(object):
-    # Changes that are always applied to a response (in this order).
Step30
Add Experience
Add Experience
HttpResponse doesn't handle memoryview objects
Description
I am trying to write a BinaryField retrieved from the database into a HttpResponse. When the database is Sqlite this works correctly, but Postgresql returns the 
contents of the field as a memoryview object and it seems like current Django doesn't like this combination:
Problem Statement
Figure 10: Comparison of Raw Experience (Left) vs. MemGovern’s Processed Experience (Right). Raw experi-
ence distracts the agent with unrelated code changes, leading to an incomplete patch. Governed experience isolates
the core repair logic, enabling the agent to correctly handle both memoryview and bytearray cases.
16


Fields
• "Problem Summary" (String): Concise technical summary of the bug root pattern. Must be generalizable; do NOT
include repository names, commit hashes, or overly specific variable names.
• "Signals" (List[String], 10–18 items): High-signal matchable keywords/phrases extracted ONLY from the issue
content. Each item is a short term (typically 2–4 words) covering mechanism/type, symptom/failure mode, trigger/in-
put/environment, and affected component; include common aliases when helpful (e.g., NPE / null pointer). Avoid
vague stop words; no duplicates.
• "Root Cause" (String): Evidence-backed causal chain from trigger to failure and the violated assumption. If un-
certain, provide 1–2 candidate root causes, each with supporting evidence and a concrete observation/test to disam-
biguate.
• "Fix Strategy" (String): Design-level summary of how the bug was addressed (e.g., validation/guards, ordering/s-
tate transitions, parsing rules, synchronization, error handling/reporting). Mention constraints and compatibility notes
(behavior/API, backward compatibility, performance impact), plus trade-offs/risks and mitigations. Do NOT restate
the patch line-by-line.
• "Patch Digest" (String): Structured semantic digest grounded in the diff. Must include Changed Areas (generalized
components/modules/files) and 3–8 Key Chunks describing what changed and why, linked back to the root cause. Do
NOT paste raw diffs or large code blocks.
• "Verification" (String): Concrete, checkable verification plan and evidence: reproduce steps (before/after), tests
added/updated (unit/integration/regression), and key edge cases/boundaries. If the patch has no tests, propose minimal
steps with expected outcomes.
Figure 11: MemGovern’s Experience Card Schema.
17