A Joint Model of Language and Perception
for Grounded Attribute Learning
Cynthia Matuszek
cynthia@cs.washington.edu
Nicholas FitzGerald
nfitz@cs.washington.edu
Luke Zettlemoyer
lsz@cs.washington.edu
Liefeng Bo
lfb@cs.washington.edu
Dieter Fox
fox@cs.washington.edu
Computer Science and Engineering, Box 352350, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-2350
Abstract
As robots become more ubiquitous and ca-
pable, it becomes ever more important for
untrained users to easily interact with them.
Recently, this has led to study of the lan-
guage grounding problem, where the goal
is to extract representations of the mean-
ings of natural language tied to the physi-
cal world. We present an approach for joint
learning of language and perception models
for grounded attribute induction. The per-
ception model includes classiﬁers for phys-
ical characteristics and a language model
based on a probabilistic categorial grammar
that enables the construction of composi-
tional meaning representations. We evaluate
on the task of interpreting sentences that de-
scribe sets of objects in a physical workspace,
and demonstrate accurate task performance
and eﬀective latent-variable concept induc-
tion in physical grounded scenes.
1. Introduction
Physically grounded settings provide exciting oppor-
tunities for learning. For example, a person might be
able to teach a robot about objects in its environment.
However, to do this, a robot must jointly reason about
the diﬀerent modalities encountered (for example lan-
guage and vision), and induce rich associations with
as little guidance as possible.
Consider a simple sentence such as “These are the yel-
low blocks,” uttered in a setting where there is a phys-
Appearing in Proceedings of the 29 th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, 2012.
Copyright 2012 by the author(s)/owner(s).
ical workspace that contains a number of objects that
vary in shape and color. We assume that a robot can
understand sentences like this if it can solve the as-
sociated grounded object selection task. Speciﬁcally, it
must realize that words such as “yellow” and “blocks”
refer to object attributes, and ground the meaning of
such words by mapping them to a perceptual system
that will enable it to identify the speciﬁc physical ob-
jects referred to. To do so robustly, even in cases where
words or attributes are new, our robot must learn (1)
visual classiﬁers that identify the appropriate object
properties, (2) representations of the meaning of indi-
vidual words that incorporate these classiﬁers, and (3)
a model of compositional semantics used to analyze
complete sentences.
In this paper, we present an approach for jointly learn-
ing these components. Our approach builds on exist-
ing work on visual attribute classiﬁcation (Bo et al.,
2011) and probabilistic categorial grammar induction
for semantic parsing (Zettlemoyer & Collins, 2005;
Kwiatkowski et al., 2011). Speciﬁcally, our system in-
duces new grounded concepts (groups of words along
with the parameters of the attribute classiﬁer they are
paired with) from a set of scenes containing only sen-
tences, images, and indications of what objects are
being referred to. As a result, it can be taught to rec-
ognize previously unknown object attributes by some-
one describing objects while pointing out the relevant
objects in a set of training scenes.
Learning is on-
line, adding one scene at a time, and EM-like, in that
the parameters are updated to maximize the expected
marginal likelihood of the latent language and visual
components of the model. This integrated approach
allows for eﬀective model updates with no explicit la-
beling of logical meaning representations or attribute
classiﬁer outputs.
We evaluate this approach on data gathered on Ama-

A Joint Model of Language and Perception for Grounded Attribute Learning
zon Mechanical Turk, in which people describe sets of
objects on a table. Experiments demonstrate that the
joint learning approach can eﬀectively extend the set
of grounded concepts in an incomplete model initial-
ized with supervised training on a small dataset. This
provides a simple mechanism for learning vocabulary
in a physical environment.
Figure 1. An example of an RGB-D object identiﬁcation
scene. Columns on the right show example segments, iden-
tiﬁed as positive (far right) and negative (center).
2. Overview of the Approach
Problem We wish to learn a joint language and per-
ception model for the object selection task. The goal
is to automatically map a natural language sentence
x and a set of scene objects O to the subset G ⊆O
of objects described by x.
The left panel of Fig. 1
shows an example scene. Here, O is the set of objects
present in this scene. The individual objects o ∈O are
extracted from the scene via segmentation (the right
panel of Fig. 1 shows example segments). Given the
sentence x =“Here are the yellow ones,” the goal is to
select the ﬁve yellow objects for the named set G.
Model Components
Given a sentence and seg-
mented scene objects, we learn a distribution P(G |
x, O) over the selected set.
Our approach combines
recent models of language and vision, including:
(1) A semantic parsing model that deﬁnes P(z|x), a
distribution over logical meaning representations z for
each sentence x. In our running example, the desired
representation z = λx.color(x, yellow) is a lambda-
calculus expression that deﬁnes a set of objects that
are yellow. For this task, we build on an existing se-
mantic parsing model (Kwiatkowski et al., 2011).
(2) A set of visual attribute classiﬁers C, where each
classiﬁer c ∈C deﬁnes a distribution P(c = true|o)
of the classiﬁer returning true for each possible object
o ∈O in the scene. For example, there would be a
unique classiﬁer c ∈C for each possible color or shape
an object can have. We use logistic regression to train
classiﬁers on color and shape features extracted from
object segments recorded using a Kinect depth camera.
Joint Model We combine these language and vision
models in two ways. First, we introduce an explicit
model of alignment between the logical constants in
the logical form z and classiﬁers in the set C. This
alignment would, for example, enable us to learn that
the logical constant yellow should be paired with a
classiﬁer c ∈C that ﬁres on yellow objects.
Next, we introduce an execution model that allows
us to determine what scene objects in O would be
selected by a logical expression z, given the classi-
ﬁers in C.
This allows us to, for example, execute
λx.color(x, green)∧shape(x, triangle) by testing all of
the objects with the appropriate classiﬁers (for green
and triangle), then selecting objects on which both
classiﬁers return true. This execution model includes
uncertainty from the semantic parser P(z|x), classiﬁer
conﬁdences P(c = true|o), and a deterministic ground-
truth constraint that encodes what objects are actually
intended to be selected. Full details are in Sec. 5.
Model Learning
We present an approach that
learns the meaning of new words from a dataset D =
{(xi, Oi, Gi) | i = 1 . . . n}, where each example i con-
tains a sentence xi, the objects Oi, and the selected
set Gi.
This setup is an abstraction of the situa-
tion where a teacher mentions xi while pointing to
the objects Gi ⊆Oi she describes. As described in
detail in Sec. 6, learning proceeds in an online, EM-
like fashion by repeatedly estimating expectations over
the latent logical forms zi and the outputs of the clas-
siﬁers c ∈C, then using these expectations to update
the parameters of the component models for language
P(z|x) and visual classiﬁcation P(c|o). To bootstrap
the learning approach, we ﬁrst train a limited language
and perception system in a fully supervised way: in
this stage, each example additionally contains labeled
logical meaning expressions and classiﬁer outputs, as
described in Sec. 6.
3. Related Work
To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the
ﬁrst approach for jointly learning visual classiﬁers and
semantic parsers, to produce rich, compositional mod-
els that span directly from sensors to meaning. How-
ever, there is signiﬁcant related work on the model
components, and on grounded learning in general.
Vision
Current state-of-the-art object recognition
systems (Felzenszwalb et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2009)
are based on local image descriptors, for example
SIFT over images (Lowe, 2004) and Spin Images over
3D point clouds (Johnson & Hebert, 1999).
Visual

A Joint Model of Language and Perception for Grounded Attribute Learning
this
red
block
is
in the
shape
of a
half-pipe
N/N
N
N\N
S\N/N
N/N
N/NP
NP/NP
NP
λf.f
λx.color(x, red)
λf.f
λf.λg.λx.f(x) ∧g(x)
λf.f
λy.λx.shape(x, y)
λx.x
arch
N
N/NP
NP
λx.color(x, red)
λy.λx.shape(x, y)
arch
N
N
λx.color(x, red)
λx.shape(x, arch)
S\N
λg.λx.shape(x, arch) ∧g(x)
S
λx.shape(x, arch) ∧color(x, red)
Figure 2. An example semantic analysis for a sentence from our dataset.
attributes provide rich descriptions of objects, and
have become a popular topic in the vision commu-
nity (Farhadi et al., 2009; Parikh & Grauman, 2011);
although very successful, we still lack a deep un-
derstanding of the design rules underlying them and
how they measure similarity.
Recent work on ker-
nel descriptors (Bo et al., 2010) shows that these
hand-designed features are equivalent to a type of
match kernel that performs similarly to sparse cod-
ing (Yang et al., 2009; Yu & Zhang, 2010) and deep
networks (Lee et al., 2009) on many object recogni-
tion benchmarks (Bo et al., 2010). We adapt kernel
descriptors as feature extractors for attribute classi-
ﬁers because of their strong empirical performance.
Semantic
Parsing
There has been signiﬁcant
work on supervised learning for inducing semantic
parsers (Zelle & Mooney, 1996; He & Young, 2006;
Wong & Mooney, 2007). Our research builds on work
on supervised learning of CCG parsers (Zettlemoyer &
Collins, 2005; Kwiatkowski et al., 2011); there is also
work on performing semantic analysis with alternate
forms of supervision. Clarke (2010) and Liang (2011)
describe approaches to learning semantic parsers from
questions paired with database answers, while Gold-
wasser (2011) presents work on unsupervised learning.
However, none of these approaches include joint mod-
els of language and vision.
Grounding
There has been signiﬁcant work on
grounded learning more generally in the robotics and
vision communities. A full review is beyond the scope
of this paper, so we highlight a few examples. Roy de-
veloped a series of techniques for grounding words in
visual scenes (Mavridis & Roy, 2006; Reckman et al.,
2010; Gorniak & Roy, 2003). In computer vision, the
grounding problem often relates to detecting objects
and attributes in visual information (e.g., see (Barnard
et al., 2003)); however, these approaches primarily fo-
cus on isolated word meaning, rather than compo-
sitional semantic analyses.
Most closely related to
our work are approaches that learn probabilistic lan-
guage models from natural language input (Matuszek
et al., 2012; Chen & Mooney, 2011), especially those
that include a visual component (Tellex et al., 2011).
However, these approaches ground language into pre-
deﬁned language formalisms, rather than extending
the model to account for entirely novel input.
4. Background on Semantic Parsing
Our grounded language learning incorporates a state-
of-the-art model, FUBL, for semantic parsing, as re-
viewed in this section.
FUBL (Kwiatkowski et al.,
2011) is an algorithm for learning factored Combina-
tory Categorial Grammar (CCG) lexicons for seman-
tic parsing.
Given a dataset {(xi, zi) | i = 1...n}
of natural language sentences xi, which are paired
with logical forms zi that represent their meaning,
UBL learns a factored lexicon Λ made up of a set
of lexemes L and a set of lexical templates T. Lex-
emes combine with templates in order to form lexi-
cal items, which can be used by a semantic parser to
parse natural language sentences into logical forms.
For example, given the sentence x =“this red block
is in the shape of a half-pipe” and the logical form
zi = λx.color(x, red) ∧shape(x, arch), FUBL learns a
parse like the example in ﬁgure 2. In this parse, the
lexeme (half-pipe, [arch]) has combined with the tem-
plate λ(ω,⃗v). [ω ⊢NP : ⃗v1] to yield the lexical item
half-pipe ⊢NP : arch.
FUBL also learns a log-linear model which produces
the probability of a parse y that yields logical form z
given the sentence x:
P(y, z | x; ΘL, Λ) =
eΘL·φ(x,y,z)
P
(y′,z′) eΘL·φ(x,y′,z′)
(1)
where φ(x, y, z) is a feature vector encompassing the
lexemes and lexical templates used to generate y,
amongst other things.
In this work, we initialize our parse model using the
standard FUBL approach, followed by automatically
inducing lexemes paired with new visual attributes not
present in the initial training set, as we will see in the
next section.

A Joint Model of Language and Perception for Grounded Attribute Learning
5. Joint Language/Perception Model
As described in Sec. 2, the object selection task is to
identify a subset of objects, G, given a scene O and an
NL sentence x. We deﬁne a possible world w to be a
set of classiﬁer outputs, where wo,c ∈{T, F} speciﬁes
the boolean output of classiﬁer c for object o.
Our
joint probabilistic model is:
P(G | x, O) =
X
z
X
w
P(G, z, w | x, O)
(2)
where the latent variable z over logical forms models
linguistic uncertainty and the latent w over possible
worlds models perceptual uncertainty.
We further decompose (2) into a product of models for
language, vision, and grounded execution. This ﬁnal
model selects the named objects G, motivated in Sec. 2
and described below; the ﬁnal decomposition is:
P(G, z, w | x, O) = P(z | x)P(w | O)P(G | z, w)
(3)
Here, the language model P(z|x) and vision model
P(w|O) are held in agreement by the conditional prob-
ability term P(G|z, w). Let z(w) be the set of objects
that are selected, under the assignment in w, when
z is applied to them.
For example, the expression
z = λx.shape(x, cube)∧color(x, red) would return true
when applied to the objects in w for which the classi-
ﬁers for the cube and red logical constants return true.
Now, P(G|z, w) forces agreement and models object
selection by putting all of its probability mass on the
set G that equals z(w).
In this formulation, the language and vision dis-
tributions are conditionally independent given this
agreement.
The semantic parsing model P(z|x)
builds on previous work, as described in eqn. (1).
The perceptual classiﬁcation P(w|O) is deﬁned as
follows: we assume each perceptual classiﬁer is applied
independently, decomposing this term into:
P(w | O) =
Y
o∈O
Y
c∈C
P(wo,c|o)
(4)
where the probability of a world is simply the product
of the probabilities of the individual classiﬁer assign-
ments for all of the objects.
Each classiﬁer is a logistic regression model, where the
probability of a classiﬁer c on a given object o is:
P(wo,c = 1|o; ΘP ) =
eΘP
c ·φ(o)
1 + eΘP
c ·φ(o)
(5)
where ΘP
c is the parameters in ΘP for classiﬁer c. This
approach provides a simple, direct way to couple the
individual language and vision components to model
the object selection task.
Inference There are two key inference problems in a
model of this type. During learning, we need to com-
pute the marginal distribution P(z, w|x, O, G) over la-
tent logical forms z and perceptual assignments w
(see next section).
At test time, we must compute
arg maxG P(G|x, O) to ﬁnd the set of named objects.
Computing this probability distribution requires sum-
ming the total probability of all world/logical form
pairs that name G.
For each possible world w, de-
termining if z names G is equivalent to a SAT prob-
lem, as z can theoretically encode an arbitrary logi-
cal expression that will name the appropriate G only
when satisﬁed. Computing the marginal probability
is then a weighted model counting problem, which is
in #-P. However, the logical expressions allowed by
our current grammar—conjunctions of unary attribute
descriptors—admit eﬃcient exact computation, de-
scribed below.
6. Model Learning
The physically grounded joint learning problem is to
induce a model P(G|x, O), given data of the form
D = {(xi, Oi, Gi) | i = 1 . . . n}, where each example i
contains a sentence xi, the objects Oi, and the selected
set Gi. We consider the case where the learner already
has a partial model, including a CCG parser with a
small vocabulary and a small set of attribute classi-
ﬁers. The goal is to automatically extend the model
to induce new classiﬁers that are tied to new words
in the semantic parser. We ﬁrst describe the learning
algorithm, then present how we initialize the approach
by learning decoupled models from small datasets with
more extensive annotations.
Aligning Words to Classiﬁers One key challenge
is to learn to create new attribute classiﬁers associ-
ated with unseen words in the sentences xi in the data
D. We take a simple, exhaustive approach by creating
a set of k new classiﬁers, initialized to uniform dis-
tributions. Each classiﬁer is additionally paired with
a new logical constant in the FUBL lambda-calculus
language. Finally, a new lexeme is created by pairing
each previously unknown word in a sentence in D with
either one of these new classiﬁer constants, or the logi-
cal expressions from an existing lexeme in the lexicon.
The parsing weights for the indicator features for each
of these additions are set to 0. This approach learns,
through the probabilistic updates described below, to
jointly reestimate the parameters of both the new clas-
siﬁers and the expanded semantic parsing model.
Parameter Estimation
We aim to estimate the
language parameters ΘL and perception parameters

A Joint Model of Language and Perception for Grounded Attribute Learning
ΘP from data D = {(xi, Oi, Gi) | i = 1 . . . n}, as
deﬁned above.
We want to ﬁnd parameter settings
that maximize the marginal log likelihood of D:
LL(D; ΘL, ΘP ) =
X
i=1...n
ln P(Gi|xi, Oi; ΘL, ΘP )
(6)
This objective is non-convex due to the sum over latent
assignments for the logical form z and attribute classi-
ﬁer outputs w in the deﬁnition of P(Gi|xi, Oi; ΘL, ΘP )
from eqn. (2). However, if z and w are labeled, the
overall algorithm reduces to simply training the log-
linear models for the semantic parser P(z|xi; ΘL) and
attribute classiﬁers P(w|Oi; ΘP ), both well-studied
problems.
In this situation, we can use an EM
algorithm to ﬁrst estimate the marginal P(z, w
|
xi, Oi, Gi; ΘL, ΘP ), then maximize the expected like-
lihood according to the distribution, with a weighted
version of our familiar log-linear model parameter up-
dates. We present an online version of this approach,
with updates computed one example at a time.
Computing Expectations For each example i, we must
compute the marginal over latent variables given by:
P(z, w | xi, Oi, Gi; ΘL, ΘP ) =
P(z | xi; ΘL)P(w | Oi; ΘP )P(Gi|z, w)
P
z′
P
w′ P(z′ | xi; ΘL)P(w′ | Oi; ΘP )P(Gi|z′, w′)
(7)
Since computing all possible parses z is exponential
in the length of the sentence, we use beam search to
ﬁnd the top-N parses. This exact inference could be
replaced with an approximate method, such as MC-
SAT, to accommodate a more permissive grammar.
Conditional Expected Gradient For each example, we
update the parameters with the expected gradient,
according to the marginal distribution above. For the
language parameters ΘL, the gradient is
∆L =
X
z′
X
w′
P(z′, w′ | xi, Oi, Gi; ΘL, ΘP )∗
(EP (y|xi,z′;ΘL)
h
φL
j (xi, y, z′)
i
−
EP (y,z|xi;ΘL)
h
φL
j (xi, y, z)
i
)
(8)
where the inner diﬀerence of expectations is the fa-
miliar gradient of a log-linear model for conditional
random ﬁelds with hidden variables (Quattoni et al.,
2007; Kwiatkowski et al., 2010), and is weighted ac-
cording to the expectation.
Similarly, for the perception parameters ΘP , the gra-
dient is:
∆P
c =
X
z′
X
w′
P(z′, w′ | xi, Oi, Gi; ΘL, ΘP )∗
X
o∈Oi
h
w′
o,c −P(w′
o,c = 1 | φ(o); ΘP )
i
φ(o)
(9)
where the inner sum ranges over the objects and adds
in the familiar gradient for logistic regression binary-
classiﬁcation models.
Online Updates
We use a simple, online parameter
estimation scheme that loops over the data K = 10
(picked on validation set) times. For each data point
i consisting of the tuple (xi, Oi, Gi), we perform an
update where we take a step according to the above
expected gradient over the latent variables. We use a
learning rate of 0.1 with a constant decay of .00001
per update for all experiments.
Discussion
This complete learning approach pro-
vides an eﬃcient online algorithm that closely matches
the style of interactive, grounded language learning we
are pursuing in this work. Given the decayed learning
rate, the algorithm is guaranteed to converge, but lit-
tle can be said about the optimality of the solution.
However, as we see in Sec. 7, the approach works well
in practice for the object set selection task we consider.
Bootstrapping To construct the initial limited lan-
guage and perceptual models, we make use of a small,
supervised data set Dsup = {(xi, zi, wi, Oi, Gi) | i =
1 . . . m}, which matches our previous setup but ad-
ditionally labels the latent logical form zi and clas-
siﬁer outputs wi.
As mentioned above, learning in
this setting is completely decoupled and we can es-
timate the semantic parsing distribution P(zi|xi; ΘL)
with the FUBL learning algorithm (Kwiatkowski et al.,
2011) and the attribute classiﬁers P(wi|Oi; ΘP ) with
gradient ascent for logistic regression. As we show ex-
perimentally, Dsup can often be quite small, and will in
general not contain many of the words and attributes
that must be additionally learned in the full approach.
Exploring approaches for learning without Dsup, such
as replacing it with interactive dialog with a human
teacher, is an important area for future work.
7. Experimental Setup
Data Set
Data was collected using a selection of
toys, including wooden blocks, plastic food, and build-
ing bricks. For each scene, we collected short RGB-D
videos with a Kinect depth camera, showing a per-
son gesturing to a subset of the objects.
Natural
language annotations were gathered using Mechanical
Turk; workers were asked to describe the objects be-
ing pointed to in the video (see Fig. 3). The referenced

A Joint Model of Language and Perception for Grounded Attribute Learning
Figure 3. Example scenes presented on Mechanical Turk.
Left: A scene that elicited the descriptions “here are some
red things” and “these are various types of red colored
objects”, both labeled as λx.color(x, red). Right: A scene
associated with sentence/meaning pairs such as “this toy
is orange cube” and λx.color(x, orange) ∧shape(x, cube).
objects were then marked as belonging to G, the posi-
tive set of objects for that scene. A total of 142 scenes
were shown, eliciting descriptions of 12 attributes, di-
vided evenly into shapes and colors. In total, there
were 1003 sentence/annotation pairs.
Perceptual Features To automatically segment ob-
jects from each scene, we performed RANSAC plane
ﬁtting on the Kinect depth values to ﬁnd the ta-
ble plane, then extracted connected components (seg-
ments) of points more than a minimum distance above
that plane. After getting segmented objects, features
for every object are extracted using kernel descrip-
tors (Bo et al., 2011). We extract two types of features,
for depth values and RGB values; these correspond to
shape and color attributes, respectively. During train-
ing, the system learns logistic regression classiﬁers us-
ing these features. In the initialization phase used to
bootstrap the model, the annotation provides informa-
tion about which language attributes relate to shape
or color. However, this information is not provided in
the training phase.
Language Features We follow (Kwiatkowski et al.,
2011) in including a standard set of binary indicator
features to deﬁne the log-linear model P(z|x; ΘL) over
logical forms, given sentences. This includes indicators
for which lexical entries were used and properties of
the logical forms that are constructed. These features
allow the joint learning approach to weight lexical se-
lection against evidence provided by the compositional
analysis and the visual model components.
8. Results
This section presents results and a discussion of our
evaluation. We demonstrate eﬀective learning in the
full model for the object set selection task.
We
then brieﬂy describe ablation studies and examples of
learned models..
8.1. Object Set Selection
To measure set selection task performance, we di-
vided the data according to attribute.
To initialize
the model, we used the data for six of the attributes to
train supervised classiﬁers, and provided logical forms
for the corresponding sentences to train the initial se-
mantic parsing model, as described at the end of Sec. 6.
Data for the remaining six attributes were used for
evaluation, with 80% allocated for training and 20%
held out for testing.
Here, all of the visual scenes
are previously unseen, the words in the sentences de-
scribing the new attributes are unknown, and the only
available labels are the output object set G.
We report precision, recall, and F1-score on the set
selection task. Results are averaged over 10 diﬀerent
runs with the training data presented in diﬀerent ran-
domized orders. The system performs well, achieving
an average precision of 82%, recall of 71%, and a 76%
F1-score. This level of performance is achieved rela-
tively quickly; performance generally converges within
ﬁve passes over the training data.
8.2. Ablation Studies
To examine the need for a joint model, we measure
performance of two models in which either the lan-
guage or the visual component is sharply limited. In
each case, performance signiﬁcantly degrades. These
results are summarized in Fig. 4.
Vision
In order to measure how a set of classiﬁers
would perform on the set selection task with only a
simple language model, we manually created a the-
saurus of words used in the dataset to refer to target
attributes containing, on average, 5 diﬀerent ways of
referring to each color and shape. To learn the unsu-
pervised concepts for this baseline, we ﬁrst extracted
a list of all words appearing in the training corpus but
not in the initialization data; words which appear in
the thesaurus are grouped into synonym sets. To train
classiﬁers, we collect objects from scenes in which only
terms from the given synonym set appear. Any syn-
onym set which does not occur in at least 2 distinct
scenes is discarded. The resulting positive and neg-
ative objects are used to train classiﬁers. To gener-
ate a predicted set of objects at test time, we ﬁnd all
synonym sets which occur in the sentence x, and de-
termine whether the classiﬁers associated with those
words successfully identify the object.
Averaged across our trials, the results are as follows:
Precision=0.92; Recall=0.41; F1-score=0.55.
These
results are, on average, notably worse than the per-
formance of the jointly trained model.

A Joint Model of Language and Perception for Grounded Attribute Learning
Semantic Parsing As a baseline for testing how well
a pure parsing model will perform when the perception
model is ablated, we run the parsing model obtained
during initialization directly on the test set, training
no new classiﬁers. Since the parser is capable of gener-
ating parses by skipping unknown words, this baseline
is equivalent to treating the unknown concept words
as if they are semantically empty.
Averaged across our trials, the results are as follows:
Precision=0.52; Recall=0.09; F1-score=0.14. Not sur-
prisingly, a substantial number of parses selected no
objects, as the parser has no way of determining the
meaning of an unknown word.
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Vision
0.92
0.41
0.55
Language
0.52
0.09
0.14
Joint
0.82
0.71
0.76
Figure 4. A summary of precision, recall, and F1 for ab-
lated models and the joint learning model.
8.3. Discussion and Examples
This section discusses typical training runs and data
requirements. We present examples of learned mod-
els, highlighting what is learned and typical errors,
and then describe simple experiment investigating the
amount of supervised data required for initialization.
Classiﬁer performance after training eﬀects the sys-
tem’s ability to perform the set selection task. Dur-
ing a sample trial, average accuracy of color and shape
classiﬁers for newly learned concepts are 97% and 74%,
respectively. Although these values are suﬃcient for
reasonable task performance, there are some failures—
for example, the shape attributes “cube” and “cylin-
der” are sometimes challenging to diﬀerentiate.
As noted in Sec. 4, the semantic parser contains lex-
emes that pair words with learned classiﬁers, and fea-
tures that indicate lexeme use during parsing. Fig. 5
shows some selected word/classiﬁer pairs, along with
the weight for their associated feature (each trial pro-
Figure 5. Feature weights for hypothesized lexemes pairing
natural language words (rows) with newly created terms
referring to novel classiﬁers (columns), as well as the spe-
cial null token.
Each weight serves as an unnormalized
indicator of which associations are preferred.
duces a large number of such lexemes). The classiﬁers
new0–new2 and new3–new5 are color and shape
classiﬁers, respectively. As can be seen, each of the
novel attributes is most strongly associated with a
newly-created classiﬁer, while irrelevant words such as
“thing” tend to parse to null. The system must iden-
tify which of the classiﬁer types to use for novel words.
We ran additional tests investigating whether the sys-
tem is able to learn synonyms. Here, we split the data
so that the training set has attributes learned during
initialization, but are referred to by new, synonymous
words. These runs performed comparably to those re-
ported above; the approach easily learns lexemes that
pair these new words with the appropriate classiﬁers.
Finally, we brieﬂy discuss the eﬀects of reducing the
amount of annotated data used to initialize the lan-
guage and perception model (see Fig. 6).
As can
be seen, with fewer than 150 sentences, the learned
grammar does not seem to have suﬃcient coverage to
model unknown words in joint learning; however, be-
yond that, performance is quite stable.
Figure 6. Example F1-score on object recognition from
models initialized with reduced amounts of labeled data,
reported over one particular data split. The F1-score for
this split peaks at roughly 73%.
9. Conclusion
This paper presents a joint model of language and
perception for grounded attribute learning. Our ap-
proach learns representations of the meanings of natu-
ral language, using visual perception to ground those
meanings in the physical world. Learning is performed
via optimizing the data log-likelihood using an online,
EM-like training algorithm.
This system is able to
learn accurate language and attribute models for the
object set selection task, given data containing only
language, raw percepts, and the target objects.
By
jointly learning language and perception models, the
approach can identify which novel words are color at-
tributes, shape attributes, or no attributes at all.
We believe our approach has signiﬁcant potential to
scale to general language grounding problems. In par-
ticular, our modular framework was designed to eas-
ily incorporate future advances in visual classiﬁcation

A Joint Model of Language and Perception for Grounded Attribute Learning
and semantic parsing. We are also working to scale the
complexity of the language and physical scenes, with
the eventual goal of robust learning in completely un-
constrained environments.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded in part by the Intel Science and Technology
Center for Pervasive Computing, the Robotics Consortium spon-
sored by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory under the Collabora-
tive Technology Alliance Program (W911NF-10-2-0016), and NSF
grant IIS-1115966.
References
Barnard, K., Duygulu, P., Forsyth, D., De Freitas, N.,
Blei, D.M., and Jordan, M.I. Matching words and pic-
tures.
The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:
1107–1135, 2003.
Bo, L., Ren, X., and Fox, D. Kernel descriptors for visual
recognition. In Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), 2010.
Bo, L., Ren, X., and Fox, D. Depth kernel descriptors for
object recognition. In IEEE/RSJ Int’l Conf. on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2011.
Chen, D.L. and Mooney, R.J. Learning to interpret natural
language navigation instructions from observations. In
Proc. of the 25th AAAI Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AAAI-2011), pp. 859–865, August 2011.
Clarke, J., Goldwasser, D., Chang, M., and Roth, D. Driv-
ing semantic parsing from the world’s response. In Proc.
of the Conf. on Computational Natural Language Learn-
ing, 2010.
Farhadi, A., Endres, I., Hoiem, D., and Forsyth, D. De-
scribing objects by their attributes. In IEEE Conf. on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009.
Felzenszwalb, P., Girshick, R., McAllester, D., and Ra-
manan, D.
Object detection with discriminatively
trained part based models.
IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 32(9):1627–
1645, 2009.
Goldwasser, D., Reichart, R., Clarke, J., and Roth, D.
Conﬁdence driven unsupervised semantic parsing.
In
Proceedings. of the Association of Computational Lin-
guistics, 2011.
Gorniak, P. and Roy, D.
Understanding complex visu-
ally referring utterances. In Proc. of the HLT-NAACL
2003 Workshop on Learning Word Meaning from Non-
Linguistic Data, 2003.
He, Y. and Young, S. Spoken language understanding using
the hidden vector state model. Speech Communication,
48(3-4), 2006.
Johnson, A. and Hebert, M. Using spin images for eﬃcient
object recognition in cluttered 3D scenes. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
21(5), 1999.
Kwiatkowski, T., Zettlemoyer, L.S., Goldwater, S., and
Steedman, M.
Inducing probabilistic CCG grammars
from logical form with higher-order uniﬁcation. In Proc.
of the Conf. on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, 2010.
Kwiatkowski, T., Zettlemoyer, L.S., Goldwater, S., and
Steedman, M. Lexical generalization in CCG grammar
induction for semantic parsing.
In Proc. of the Conf.
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
2011.
Lee, H., Grosse, R., Ranganath, R., and Ng, A. Convo-
lutional deep belief networks for scalable unsupervised
learning of hierarchical representations. In Proc. of the
Int’l Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), 2009.
Liang,
P.,
Jordan,
M.I.,
and Klein,
D.
Learning
dependency-based compositional semantics. In Proc. of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
Lowe, D. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant
keypoints.
Int’l Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV),
60:91–110, 2004.
Matuszek, C., Herbst, E., Zettlemoyer, L., and Fox, D.
Learning to parse natural language commands to a robot
control system. In Proc. of the 13th Int’l Symposium on
Experimental Robotics (ISER), June 2012.
Mavridis, N. and Roy, D. Grounded situation models for
robots: Where words and percepts meet. In IEEE/RSJ
Int’l Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2006.
Parikh, D. and Grauman, K. Relative attributes. In Int’l
Conf. on Computer Vision, 2011.
Quattoni, A., Wang, S., p Morency, L., Collins, M., Darrell,
T., and Csail, Mit.
Hidden-state conditional random
ﬁelds. In IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2007.
Reckman, H., Orkin, J., and Roy, D. Learning meanings of
words and constructions, grounded in a virtual game. In
Proc. of the 10th Conf. on Natural Language Processing
(KONVENS), 2010.
Tellex, S., Kollar, T., Dickerson, S., Walter, M.R., Baner-
jee, A.G., Teller, S., and Roy, N. Understanding natural
language commands for robotic navigation and mobile
manipulation. In Proc. of the National Conf. on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence (AAAI), August 2011.
Wong, Y.W. and Mooney, R.J.
Learning synchronous
grammars for semantic parsing with lambda calculus. In
Proc. of the Ass’n for Computational Linguistics, 2007.
Yang, J., Yu, K., Gong, Y., and Huang, T. Linear spatial
pyramid matching using sparse coding for image classiﬁ-
cation. In IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2009.
Yu, K. and Zhang, T. Improved local coordinate coding
using local tangents. In Proc. of the Int’l Conf. on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML), 2010.
Zelle, J.M. and Mooney, R.J. Learning to parse database
queries using inductive logic programming. In Proc. of
the National Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1996.
Zettlemoyer, L.S. and Collins, M. Learning to map sen-
tences to logical form:
Structured classiﬁcation with
probabilistic categorial grammars. In Proc. of the Conf.
on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2005.
