VARIATIONAL INTRINSIC CONTROL
Karol Gregor, Danilo Rezende and Daan Wierstra
DeepMind
{karolg,danilor,wierstra}@google.com
ABSTRACT
In this paper we introduce a new unsupervised reinforcement learning method for
discovering the set of intrinsic options available to an agent. This set is learned by
maximizing the number of different states an agent can reliably reach, as measured
by the mutual information between the set of options and option termination states.
To this end, we instantiate two policy gradient based algorithms, one that creates
an explicit embedding space of options and one that represents options implicitly.
The algorithms also provide an explicit measure of empowerment in a given state
that can be used by an empowerment maximizing agent. The algorithm scales well
with function approximation and we demonstrate the applicability of the algorithm
on a range of tasks.
1
INTRODUCTION
In this paper we aim to provide an answer to the question what intrinsic options are available to
an agent in a given state – that is, options that meaningfully affect the world. We deﬁne options
as policies with a termination condition, and we are primarily concerned with their consequences
– what states in the environment they reach upon termination. The set of all options available to
an agent is independent of an agent’s intentions – it is the set of all things that are possible for an
agent to achieve. The purpose of this work is to provide an algorithm that aims to discover as many
intrinsic options as it can, using an information theoretic learning criterion and training procedure.
This differs from the traditional approach to option learning where the goal is to ﬁnd a small number
of options that are useful for a particular task (Sutton et al., 1999; McGovern & Barto, 2001; Stolle
& Precup, 2002; Silver & Ciosek, 2012; Kulkarni et al., 2016; Mankowitz et al., 2014; Vezhnevets
et al., 2016; Bacon & Precup, 2015). Limiting oneself to working with relatively small option spaces
makes both credit assignment and planning over long time intervals easier. However, we argue that
operating on the larger space of intrinsic options, as alluded to above, is in fact useful even though
the space is vastly larger. First, the number of options is still much smaller than the number of
all action sequences, since options are distinguished in terms of their ﬁnal states, and many action
sequences can reach the same state. Second, we aim to learn good representational embeddings of
these options, where similar options are close in representational space and where we can rely on
the power of generalization. In such embedded spaces a planner needs only choose a neighborhood
of this space containing options that have sufﬁciently similar consequences.
The idea of goal and state embeddings, along with a universal value function for reaching these
goals, was introduced in Schaul et al. (2015). This work allowed an agent to efﬁciently represent
control over many goals and to generalize to new goals. However, the goals were assumed to be
given. This paper extends that work and provides a mechanism for learning goals (options) while
preserving their embedded nature.
There are at least two scenarios where our algorithm can be useful. One is the classical reinforce-
ment learning case that aims to maximize an externally provided reward, as we explained above. In
this case, rather than learning options to uniformly represent control, the agent can combine extrin-
sic reward with an intrinsic control maximization objective, biasing learning towards high reward
options.
The second scenario is that in which the long-term goal of the agent is to get to a state with a maximal
set of available intrinsic options – the objective of empowerment (Salge et al., 2014). This set of
options consists of those that the agent knows how to use. Note that this is not the theoretical set of
1
arXiv:1611.07507v1  [cs.LG]  22 Nov 2016

all options: it is of no use to the agent that it is possible to do something if it is unable to learn how
to do it. Thus, to maximize empowerment, the agent needs to simultaneously learn how to control
the environment as well – it needs to discover the options available to it. The agent should in fact
not aim for states where it has the most control according to its current abilities, but for states where
it expects it will achieve the most control after learning. Being able to learn available options is thus
fundamental to becoming empowered.
Let us compare this to the commonly used intrinsic motivation objective of maximizing the amount
of model-learning progress, measured as the difference in compression of its experience before and
after learning (Schmidhuber, 1991; 2010; Bellemare et al., 2016; Houthooft et al., 2016). The em-
powerment objective differs from this in a fundamental manner: the primary goal is not to understand
or predict the observations but to control the environment. This is an important point – agents can
often control an environment perfectly well without much understanding, as exempliﬁed by canoni-
cal model-free reinforcement learning algorithms (Sutton & Barto, 1998), where agents only model
action-conditioned expected returns. Focusing on such understanding might signiﬁcantly distract
and impair the agent, as such reducing the control it achieves.
Our algorithm can be viewed as learning to represent the intrinsic control space of an agent. De-
veloping this space should be seen as acquiring universal knowledge useful for accomplishing a
multitude of different tasks, such as maximizing extrinsic or intrinsic reward (see Oudeyer et al.
(2008) for an overview and useful references). This is analogous to unsupervised learning in data
processing, where the goal is to ﬁnd representations of data that are useful for other tasks. The
crucial difference here, however, is that rather than simply ﬁnding representations, we learn explicit
policies that an agent can choose to follow. Additionally, the algorithm explicitly estimates the
amount of control it has in different states – intuitively, the total number of reliably reachable states
– and can as such be used for an empowerment maximizing agent.
A most common criterion for unsupervised learning is data likelihood. For a given data set, various
algorithms can be compared based on this measure. No such commonly established measure exists
for the comparison of unsupervised learning performance in agents. One of the primary difﬁculties
is that in unsupervised learning the data is known, but in control, an agent exists in an environment
and needs to act in it in order to discover what states and dynamics it contains. Nevertheless, we
should be able to compare agents in terms of the amount of intrinsic control and empowerment
they achieve in different states. Just like there are multiple methods and objectives for unsupervised
learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016), we can devise multiple methods and objectives for unsupervised
control. Data likelihood and empowerment are both information measures: likelihood measures the
amount of information needed to describe data and empowerment measures the mutual information
between action choices and ﬁnal states. Therefore we suggest that what maximum likelihood is
to unsupervised learning, mutual information between options and ﬁnal states is to unsupervised
control.
This information measure has been introduced in the empowerment literature before (Salge et al.,
2014; Klyubin et al., 2005) along with methods for measuring it (such as Blahut (1972); Arimoto
(1972)). Recently, Mohamed & Rezende (2015) proposed an algorithm that can utilize function
approximation and deep learning techniques to operate in high-dimensional environments. How-
ever, this algorithm considers the mutual information between sequences of actions and ﬁnal states.
This corresponds to maximizing the empowerment over open loop options, where the agent a pri-
ori decides on a sequence of actions in advance, and then follows these regardless of (potentially
stochastic) environment dynamics. Obviously this often limits performance severely as the agent
cannot properly react to the environment, and it tends to lead to a signiﬁcant underestimation of
empowerment. In this paper we provide a new perspective on this measure, and instantiate two
novel algorithms that use closed loop options where actions are conditioned on state. We show, on
a number of tasks, that we can use these to both signiﬁcantly increase intrinsic control and improve
the estimation of empowerment.
The paper is structured as follows. First we formally introduce the notion of intrinsic control and its
derivation from the mutual information principle. After that, we describe our algorithm for intrinsic
control with explicit options and argue for its viability in the experimental section. Last, we touch
on intrinsic control with implicit options, and demonstrate that it scales up even better. We conclude
with a short discussion on the merits of the approach and possible extensions.
2

2
INTRINSIC CONTROL AND THE MUTUAL INFORMATION PRINCIPLE
In this section we explain how we represent intrinsic options and the corresponding objective we
optimize.
We deﬁne an option as an element Ωof a space and an associated policy π(a|s, Ω) that chooses an
action a in a state s when following Ω. The policy π has a special termination action that terminates
the option and yields a ﬁnal state sf. Now let us consider the following example spaces for Ω. 1)
Ωtakes a ﬁnite number of values Ω∈{1, . . . , n}. This is the simplest case in which for each i a
separate policy πi is followed. 2) Ωis a binary vector of length n. This captures a combinatorial
number 2n of possibilities. 3) Ω∈Rd is a d-dimensional real vector. Here the space of options is
inﬁnite. It is expected that policies for nearby Ωs will be similar in practice.
We need to express the knowledge about which regions of option space to consider. Imagine we
start in a state s0 and follow an option Ω. As environments and policies are typically stochastic,
we might terminate at different ﬁnal states at different times. The policy thus deﬁnes a probability
distribution pJ(sf|s0, Ω). Now consider two different options. If they lead to very similar states,
they should inherently, intrinsically, not be seen as different from one another. So how do we express
our knowledge regarding the effective intrinsic option set in a given state?
To help answer this question, consider an example of a discrete option case with three options
Ω1, Ω2, Ω3. Assume that Ω1 always leads to a state s1 while both Ω2 and Ω3 always lead to a state
s2. Then we would like to say that we really have two intrinsic options: Ω1 and (Ω2, Ω3). If we
were to sample these options in order to maximize behavior diversity we would half of the time
choose Ω1 and half of the time any one of Ω2, Ω3. The relative choice frequencies of Ω2 and Ω3 do
not matter in this example. We express these choices by a probability distribution pC(Ω|s0) which
we call the controllability distribution.
Intuitively, to maximize intrinsic control we should choose Ωs that maximize the diversity of ﬁnal
states while, for given Ω, controlling as precisely as possible what the ensuing ﬁnal states are. The
former can be expressed mathematically as entropy H(sf) = −P
sf p(sf|s0) log p(sf|s0) where
p(sf|s0) = P
ΩpJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC(Ω|s0). The latter, for a given Ω, can be expressed as the negative
log probability −log pJ(sf|s0, Ω) (the number of bits needed to specify the ﬁnal state given Ω)
which then needs to be averaged over Ωand sf. Subtracting these two quantities yields the objective
we wish to optimize – the mutual information I(Ω, sf|s0) between options and ﬁnal states under
probability distribution p(Ω, sf|s0) = pJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC(Ω|s0):
I(Ω, sf|s0)=−
X
sf
p(sf|s0) log p(sf|s0) +
X
Ω,sf
pJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC(Ω|s0) log pJ(sf|s0, Ω),
(1)
= −
X
Ω
pC(Ω|s0) log pC(Ω|s0) +
X
Ω,sf
pJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC(Ω|s0) log p(Ω|s0, sf). (2)
The mutual information is symmetric and the second line contains its reverse expression. This
expression has a very intuitive interpretation associated with it: we should be able to tell options
apart if we can infer them from ﬁnal states. That is, if for two options Ω1 and Ω2, upon reaching
state sf1, we can infer it was option Ω1 that was executed rather than Ω2, and when reaching a state
sf2 we can infer it was option Ω2 rather than Ω1, then Ω1 and Ω2 can be said to be intrinsically
different options. We would like to maximize the set of options – achieve a large entropy of p(Ω|s0)
(the ﬁrst term of (2)). At the same time we wish to make sure these options achieve intrinsically
different goals – that is, that they can be inferred from their ﬁnal states. This entails maximizing
log p(Ω|s0, sf), the average of which is the second term of (2).
The advantage of this formulation is the absence of the term p(sf|s0) in the formulation, which is
difﬁcult to obtain as we would have to integrate over Ω. In rewriting the derivation, however, the
term p(Ω|s0, sf) was introduced, which we arrived at from pJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC(Ω|s0) using Bayes’ rule.
The quantity pJ(sf|s0, Ω) is inherent to the environment, but obtaining Bayes’ reverse p(Ω|s0, sf)
is difﬁcult. However, it has an interpretation as a prediction of Ωfrom ﬁnal state sf. It would be
fortuitous if we could train a separate function approximator to infer this quantity. Fortunately this
is exactly what the variational bound (Mohamed & Rezende, 2015) provides (see Appendix 1 for
derivation):
3

IV B(Ω, sf|s0) = −
X
Ω
pC(Ω|s0) log pC(Ω|s0) +
X
Ω,sf
pJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC(Ω|s0) log q(Ω|s0, sf)
(3)
where q is an option inference function which can be an arbitrary distribution, and we have I ≥IV B.
In this paper we train both the parameters of pC(Ω|s0), q(Ω|s0, sf) and the parameters of policy
π(a|s, Ω) (which determines pJ(sf|s0, Ω)) to maximize IV B.
3
INTRINSIC CONTROL WITH EXPLICIT OPTIONS
In this section we provide a simple algorithm to maximize the variational bound introduced above.
Throughout we assume we have distributions, policies, and other possible functions parameterized
using recent function approximation techniques such as neural networks, and state representations
are formed from observations using recurrent neural networks. However, we only calculate the
mutual information between options and ﬁnal observations instead of ﬁnal states, and leave the
latter for future work. Algorithm 1 provides an outline of the basic training loop.
Algorithm 1 Intrinsic Control with Explicit Options
Assume an agent in a state s0
for episode = 1, M do
Sample Ω∼pC(Ω|s0)
Follow policy π(a|Ω, s) till termination state sf
Regress q(Ω|s0, sf) towards Ω
Calculate intrinsic reward rI = log q(Ω|s0, sf) −log pC(Ω|s0)
Use a reinforcement learning algorithm update for π(a|Ω, s) to maximize rI.
Reinforce option prior pC(Ω|s0) based on rI.
Set s0 = sf
end for
Note: Empowerment at s is estimated by the reinforce baseline of pC, which tracks rI.
This algorithm is derived from (3) in Appendix 2. Note again that π appears in (3) by determining the
distribution of terminal states pJ(sf|s0, Ω). Here we give an intuitive explanation of the algorithm.
In a state s0 an agent tries an option Ωfrom its available options pC(Ω|s0). Its goal is to choose
actions that lead to a state sf from which this Ωcan be inferred as well as possible using option
inference function q(Ω|s0, sf). If it can infer this option well, then it means that other options don’t
lead to this state very often, and therefore this option is intrinsically different from others. This goal
is expressed as the intrinsic reward rI (discussed in the next paragraph). The agent can use any
reinforcement learning algorithm (Sutton & Barto, 1998), such as policy gradients (Williams, 1992)
or Q-learning (Watkins, 1989; Werbos, 1977), to train a policy to maximize this reward. In the ﬁnal
state, it updates its option inference function q towards the actual Ωchosen (by taking the gradient
of log q(Ω|s0, sf)). It also reinforces the prior pC based on this reward – if the reward were high, it
should choose this option more often. Note that we can also keep prior pC ﬁxed, for example to the
uniform Gaussian distribution. Then, different values of Ωwill result in different behavior through
learning.
The intrinsic reward rI equals, on average, the logarithm of the number of different options an agent
has in a given state – that is, the empowerment in that state. This follows from the deﬁnition of
mutual information (3) – it is the expression we get when we take a sample of Ωand sf. However,
we also provide an intuitive explanation. The log pC(Ω|s0) is essentially the negative logarithm of
the number of different Ωs we can choose (for the continuous case, imagine ﬁnely discretizing).
However, not all Ωs do different things. The region where q(Ω|s0, sf) is large deﬁnes a region of
similar options. The empowerment essentially equals the number of such regions in the total region
given by pC. Taking the logarithm of the ratio of the total number of options ∼1/pC to the number
of options within a region ∼1/q gives us log q/pC = log q −log pC = rI.
We train pC using policy gradients (Williams, 1992). During training we estimate a baseline to
lower the variance of weight updates (see Appendix 2). This baseline tracks the expected return in
4

a given state – intrinsic reward in this case, which equals the empowerment. As such, the algorithm
actually yields an explicit empowerment estimate.
3.1
EXPERIMENTS
3.1.1
GRID WORLD
We demonstrate the behavior of the algorithm on a simple example of a two-dimensional grid world.
The agent lives on a grid and has ﬁve actions – it can move up, down, right, left and stay put. The
environment is noisy in the following manner: after an agent takes a step, with probability 0.2 the
agent is pushed in a random direction. We follow Algorithm 1. We choose Ωto be a discrete space of
N = 30 options. We ﬁx the option prior pC to be uniform (over 30 values). The goal is therefore to
learn a policy π(a|s, Ω) that would make the 30 options end at as different states as possible. This is
measured by the function q(Ω|sf) which, from the state sf reached, tries to infer which option Ωwas
followed. At the end of an episode we get an intrinsic reward rI = −log p + log q = log N + log q
(log N because pC = 1/N is ﬁxed). If a particular option is inferred correctly and with conﬁdence,
then log q will be close to zero and negative, and the reward will be large (≈log N). If it is wrong,
however, then log q will be very negative and the reward small. As we are choosing options at
random (from the uniform pC), in order to get a large reward on average, different options need
to reach substantially different states in order for the q to be able to infer the chosen option. In a
grid world we can plot at which locations a given option is inferred by q, which are the locations to
which the option navigates. This is shown in the Figure 1 top, with each rectangle corresponding to
a different option, and the intensity denoting the probability of predicting a given option. Thus, we
see that indeed, different options learn to navigate to different, localized places in the environment.
In this example, we use Q-learning to learn the policy. In general we can express the Q function for
a set of N different options by running the corresponding input states through a neural network and
outputting N × nactions values, one for each option and action. This way, we can update Q of all
the options at the same time efﬁciently, on a triplet of experience st, at, st+1. In this experiment we
use a linear function approximator, and terminate options with ﬁxed probability 1 −γ = 0.05. We
could also use a universal value function approximation (Schaul et al., 2015). For continuous option
spaces we can still calculate the Q by passing an input through a neural network, but then update
the result on several, randomly sampled options Ωat the same time. Such an option space is then an
option embedding in itself.
Figure 1: Learning to navigate through a grid world. Left: Standard grid world with valid
actions indicated by green arrows (left, right, up, down) and by a green disc (do nothing). Right:
Each square corresponds to a different option, and shows the probability of predicting this option
at different locations in the environment. The negative logarithm of these values is proportional to
the intrinsic reward that a given option is trying to maximize, and therefore the locations with large
intensity show the locations where a given option terminates.
3.1.2
’DANGEROUS’ GRID WORLD
The second environment is also a grid world, but with special properties. It consists of two parts:
a narrow corridor connected to an open square (see ﬁgure 2, top-left), blue denoting the walls.
However the square is not just a simple grid world, but is somewhat dangerous. There are two types
of cells arranged as a checkerboard lattice (as on a chess board). On one sub-lattice, only the left
and right actions actually move the agent to the adjacent states and on the other sub-lattice only the
up and down actions do. If the agent picks an action that is not one of these, it falls into a state
5

Figure 2: Learning to navigate through a grid world with trap states. Left: Dangerous grid
world where cells on different checkerboard sub-lattices have different sets of valid actions (green
arrows). Taking the wrong actions (red arrows and red disc) teleports the agent to the top-left corner
indicated by a cross, from which there is only a small probability of escaping at each time step. The
blue region represents a barrier, forming a narrow corridor on the top left. Furthermore, when a
valid action is taken, with some probability the agent actually does not move. Therefore if the agent
commits to a sequence of actions, it will quickly lose track as to which sub-lattice it is on, and fall
into the low empowerment top left corner state. On the other hand, if it observes the environment
it can always take actions to safely navigate the square. Bottom: Classical empowerment, which
considers the effect of (open loop) action sequences, has very small empowerment inside the square
because each sequence does not respond to changes due to environment noise and the agent instead
prefers to sit in the ‘safe’ top left corridor. This is demonstrated in the bottom ﬁgure, which shows
the exact empowerment at different locations for action sequence lengths 1, . . . , 6. We see that not
only does the square area have low empowerment, but that the amount of empowerment goes down
with increasing sequence length. With closed loop policies, on the other hand, the agent has learned
to navigate to different locations of the square, as shown in the top right ﬁgure.
where it is stuck for a long time. Furthermore, the move to an adjacent state only happens with
some probability. Because of this, if the agent doesn’t observe the environment, it quickly loses the
information about which sub lattice it is on, and thus inevitably falls to the low empowerment state.
To show this we computed the exact empowerment values at each location for an open-loop policy
using the Blahut-Arimoto algorithm for horizons 1 to 6, the result is shown in ﬁgure 2(bottom).
On the other hand, if the agent observes the environment, it knows which sub-lattice it is on and
can always choose an action that doesn’t let it fall. Thus it can safely navigate the square. In our
experiments, the agent indeed accomplishes this, and it learns options inside the square (see ﬁgure
2, top-right).
3.2
THE IMPORTANCE OF CLOSED LOOP POLICIES
Classical empowerment (Salge et al., 2014; Mohamed & Rezende, 2015) maximizes mutual infor-
mation between sequences of actions A = a1, . . . , aT and ﬁnal states. That is, it maximizes the
same objective function (3), but where Ω= A. This corresponds to maximizing empowerment over
the space of open loop options. That is, options where an agent ﬁrst commits to a sequence of ac-
tions and then blindly follows this sequence regardless of what the environment does. In contrast, in
a closed-loop option every action is conditioned on the current state. We show that using open-loop
options can lead to severe underestimation of empowerment in stochastic environments, resulting in
agents that aim to reach low-empowerment states.
We demonstrate this effect in the ’dangerous grid world’ environment, section 3.1.2. When using
open loop options of length T, an agent at the center of the environment would have exponentially
growing probability of being reset as a function of the option length T, resulting in an estimation
of empowerment that quickly decreases with the option length, having its highest value inside the
corridor at the top-left corner as shown in Figure 1 (bottom). A consequence of this is that such an
agent would prefer being inside the corridor at the top-left corner, away from the center of the grid
world.
6

In great contrast to the open loop case, when using closed loop options the empowerment will grow
quadratically with the option length, resulting in agents that prefer staying at the center of the grid
world.
While this example might seem contrived, it is actually quite ubiquitous in the real world. For
example, we can navigate around a city, whether walking or driving, quite safely. If we instead
committed to a sequence of actions ahead, we would almost certainly be run over by a car, or if
driving, crash into another car. The importance of the closed loop nature of policies is indeed well
understood. What we have demonstrated here is that one should not use open loop policies even to
measure empowerment.
3.3
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
The advantages of Algorithm 1 are: 1) It is relatively simple, 2) it uses closed loop policies, 3) it can
use general function approximation, 4) it is naturally formulated with combinatorial options spaces,
both discrete and continuous and 5) it is model-free.
The primary problem we found with this algorithm is that it is difﬁcult to make it work in practice
with function approximation. We suggest there might be two reasons for this. First, the intrinsic
reward is noisy and changing as the agent learns. This makes it difﬁcult for the policy to learn. The
algorithm worked as speciﬁed in those simple environments above when we used linear function
approximation and a small, ﬁnite number of options. However, it failed when neural networks were
substituted. We still succeeded by ﬁxing the intrinsic reward for a period of time while learning
the policy and vice versa. However, replacing the small option space by a continuous one made
training even more difﬁcult and only some runs succeeded. These problems are related to those in
deep reinforcement learning (Mnih et al., 2015), where in order to make Q learning work well with
function approximation, one needs to store a large number of experiences in memory and replay
them. It is possible that more work in this direction would ﬁnd good practices for training this
algorithm with general function and distribution approximations.
The second problem is exploration. If the agent encounters a new state, it should like to go there,
because it might correspond to some new option it hasn’t considered before and therefore increase
its control. However, when it gets there, the option inference function q has not learned it yet. It
is likely inferring the incorrect option, therefore giving a low reward and therefore discouraging
the agent from going there. While the overall objective is maximized when the agent has the most
control, the algorithm has difﬁculty maximizing this objective because two functions – the intrinsic
reward and the policy – have to match up. It does a good job of expressing what the options are in a
region it is familiar with, but it seems to fail to push into new state regions. Hence, we introduce a
new algorithm formulation in section 4 to address these issues.
4
INTRINSIC CONTROL WITH IMPLICIT OPTIONS
To address the learning difﬁculties of Algorithm 1 we use the action space itself as the option space.
This gives the inference function q grounded targets which makes it easier to train. Having a sensible
q makes the policy easier to train. The elements of the algorithm are as follows. The controllability
prior pC and policy π in Algorithm 1 simply become a policy, which we denote by πp(at|sp
t ). The
sp
t is an internal state that is calculated from (sp
t−1, xt, at−1). In our implementation it is the state
of a recurrent network. The q function in Algorithm 1 should infer the action choices made by πp
knowing the ﬁnal observation xf and thus becomes q = πq(at|sq
t) where sq is its internal state
calculated from (sq
t−1, xt, at−1, xf). The logarithm of the number of action choices at t that are
effectively different from each other – that can be distinguished based on the observation of the ﬁnal
state xf – is given by rI,t = log πq(at|sq
t) −log πp(at|sp
t ). We now introduce an algorithm that
will maximize the expected cumulative number of distinct actions by maximizing the intrinsic return
RI = P
t rI,t in algorithm 2.
In this setting, maximization of control is substantially simpliﬁed.
Consider an experience
x0, a0, . . . , xf generated by some policy. The learning of πq is a supervised learning problem of
inferring the action choices that led to xf. Even the random action policy terminates at different
states, and thus πq is able to train on such experiences, mimicking decisions that happen to lead
to xf. The πp can be thought of as choosing among those πq that lead to diverse states, which in
7

turn makes πq learn from experiences generated by those policies. The ability of πq to train on any
experience motivated us to add an exploratory update in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Intrinsic Control with Implicit Options
Full update
Follow policy πp(at|sp
t ), sp
t = f p(sp
t−1, xt, at−1) resulting in experience x0, a0, . . . , xf.
For each t, regress policy πq(at|sq
t), sq
t = f q(sq
t−1, xt, at−1, xf) towards action at
Calculate intrinsic reward rI = P
t log πq(at|sq
t) −log πp(at|sp
t )
Reinforce the policy πp with rI.
Exploratory update
Follow policy πp(at|sp
t ), sp
t = f p(sp
t−1, xt, at−1) with exploration (ϵ or other) resulting in expe-
rience x′
0, a′
0, . . . , x′
f.
For each t, regress policy πq(a′
t|sq
t), sq
t = f q(sq
t−1, x′
t, a′
t−1, x′
f) towards action a′
t
Note: Empowerment is estimated by the reinforce baseline of πp.
In the experiments that follow, we use the following functions for policies (see Appendix 3 for
the equations). Every input xt is passed through a fully connected, one layer neural network with
a standard rectiﬁer non-linearity, resulting in an embedding u(xt). This is passed to an LSTM
recurrent net (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) which outputs the policy probabilities πp over
actions. For πq, we concatenate the embedding u(xt) and u(xf) and pass through another one layer
neural net to obtain a state v(xt, xf). This, together with hidden state of the LSTM net, is passed to
another LSTM network, which outputs the probabilities πq over actions.
Two facts are worth highlighting here. First, Algorithm 2 applies to general, partially observable
environments since the policies πp and πq build their own internal states. However, more generally,
we should use ﬁnal states sf of the environment instead of observations xf as the set of states an
agent can reach. We leave this aspect to future work. Second, the policy πp can be thought of as
an implicit option. However, the embedding u(xf) of the ﬁnal observation (or state more generally)
can be thought of as an explicit option and the policy πq as the policy implementing this option.
4.1
EXPERIMENTS
We test this algorithm on several environments. The ﬁrst one is a grid world of size 25 × 25 with
four rooms (see Figure 3 left (no action noise)). A random action policy of length T leads to ﬁnal
states whose distance from the initial state is distributed approximately according to a Gaussian
distribution of width ∼
√
T within a room. For T on the order of the environment size, such an
agent rarely crosses to a different room, because of the narrow doors between the rooms. Figure
3 shows trajectories learned by Algorithm 2. We see that indeed they are extended, spanning large
parts of the environment. Furthermore many trajectories cross to different rooms passing straight
through the narrow doors without difﬁculty. This is interesting, because while the policy πq is
conditioned on the ﬁnal state, the policy πp that is actually followed was not given any notion of
the ﬁnal state explicitly. It implicitly learns to navigate through the doors to different parts of the
environment.
To maximize intrinsic control, the distribution of ﬁnal points that πp reaches should be uniform
among the points that are reachable from a given state. This is because we can tell every point from
any other point equally well. Figure 3 (center) shows the distribution of the end points reached by the
algorithm for trajectories of length 25, starting at different points in the environment. For example,
the top left square shows the end point distribution for starting at the top left corner. We see that the
distribution is indeed roughly uniform among the reachable points. The average empowerment after
learning reaches 6.0 nats which corresponds to exp(6.0) ≈403 different reachable states.
In the second experiment we use a three dimensional simulated environment (Figure 3, right). At a
given time the agent sees a particular view of its environment which is a 40 × 40 color image. The
ﬁgure shows example trajectories that the agent follows (moving downwards in the ﬁgure) using
policy πp. We see that the trajectories seem intuitively much more ‘consistent’ than those a random
action policy would produce. The average empowerment achieved for trajectories of length 12 was
5.4 nats which corresponds to reaching exp(5.4) = 221 different states.
8

Figure 3: Intrinsic Control with Implicit Options. Left and Center: The environment is a four
room 25 × 25 grid world. Left: Blue denotes the beginning of a trajectory and green the end.
The algorithm learns trajectories that extend through the environment and accurately pass through
the doors between rooms. Center: Green shows the distribution of end points for trajectories of
length 25. A trajectory in a given square starts at a location (3x + 1, 3y + 1) where (x, y) denotes
the coordinates of the room in the picture. We see that the end points cover the reachable set of
points nearly uniformly. Right: Each column shows a trajectory in a three dimensional simulated
environment. The agent only observes images. Again, we obtain very non-random trajectories that
rotate or move by a large amount. The average amount of intrinsic control achieved is 5.4 nats,
corresponding to exp(5.4) = 221 different states.
The third environment is again a grid world, but it contains blocks that the agent can push. The
blocks cannot pass through each other or through the boundary, and the agent cannot push two
blocks at the same time. In this case, the visual space is small, but there are combinatorially many
possibilities. Figure 4 shows a typical trajectory. We see that the agent pushes the ﬁrst block down,
then it goes around the second block and pushes it up, then goes to the third one and pushes it down,
and then arrives at its ﬁnal position. The average empowerment is 7.1 nats which corresponds to
being able to reach exp(7.1) ≈1200 different states.
Figure 4: Pushing blocks. Left: The agent (green) lives in a 6 × 6 grid world and can push blocks
(blue) around. The image shows a typical trajectory (read left to right). We see that the agent pushes
blocks to various locations: it pushes the ﬁrst block down, then it goes around the second one and
pushes it up, the goes to the third one pushing it down, and then moves itself up to a ﬁnal position.
Right: The empowerment as a function of training time in 6 × 6 world, with trajectories of length
15 actions, with 0, 1, 2, 3 blocks. At the beginning of training, the agent ﬁrst just learns it can go to
different locations, but then it ‘realizes’ that it can control the blocks. An average empowerment for
three blocks reached 7.1 nats which corresponds to being able to reach exp(7.1) ≈1200 states.
9

4.2
ELEMENTS BEYOND AN AGENT’S CONTROL
One prevalent feature of the real world is that there are many elements beyond our control such
as falling leaves or trafﬁc. One of the important features of these algorithms is that intrinsic op-
tions represent things that an agent can actually control and as such does not have to model all the
complexities of the real world – these algorithms are model-free. To demonstrate this property we
introduce environments with elements beyond an agent’s control.
The ﬁrst environment is the same four room grid world used above, but with two distractors moving
around at random, that live on different input feature planes. These distractors do not affect the
agent, but the agent does observe them. The agent needs to learn to ignore them. We ﬁnd that the
agent reaches the same amount of empowerment with and without the distractors (see Figure 6 in
Appendix 4).
The second environment consists of pairs of MNIST digits forming a 28×(2∗28) image. There are
ﬁve actions that affect classes of the digits. The ﬁrst action doesn’t change the classes, the next two
increase/decrease the class of the ﬁrst digit and the next two increase/decrease the class of the second
digit (wrapping around). When a class is chosen, a random digit from that class is selected. Thus the
environment is visually complex, but has a small control space. Example trajectories followed by the
agent are shown in Figure 5, left. The empowerment obtained by the agent with policies of length
10 actions is 4.6, which corresponds to exp(4.6) = 99.5 states. As there are 100 controllable states
in the environment (but 600002 total states), we see that agent achieves nearly maximum possible
intrinsic control.
Figure 5: Left: The environment consists of all possible pairs of MNIST digits. The agent can
control the classes of the digits, being able to increase or decrease the class of the ﬁrst or the second
digit but the speciﬁc instance of a digit is sampled at random. Each two digit column of the ﬁgure
shows a trajectory. A sample trajectory with the respective actions is shown on the left inset. The
agent learns to navigate this space, achieving nearly maximum possible control of 100 different
states. Note that the agent does not see the digit class, it has to learn to tell different classes apart (to
classify) through control. Right: Extrinsic reward as a function training time for pure reinforce (red)
and after a different amounts of unsupervised interaction with the environment. The environment is
15 × 15 four room grid world, and the reward is placed at location (3, 3).
4.3
OPEN VS CLOSED LOOP OPTIONS
Next we compare agents utilizing open and closed loop options. We use the grid world environment
but add noise as follows. After an agent takes a step, the environment pushes the agent in a random
direction. While the closed loop policy can correct for the environment noise, for example by
following a strategy of always going towards the goal, an open loop policy agent has less and less
information on where it is in the environment as time goes by and it cannot navigate reliably towards
the actual target location. We implement the open loop agent using the Algorithm 2 but we only feed
the starting and the end states to the recurrent network. Table 1 shows the comparison. We see that
the closed loop agent indeed performs much better.
10

Table 1: Open vs closed loop options. Agents follow open or close loop options in a grid world with
noise (see text for details). We show the empowerment as the exponential of the average number of
nats, which approximately denotes how many different states can the agent reach.
Environment
Size
Option length
Open loop
Closed loop
Open grid
6
6
2.7
5.8
Open grid
6
12
2.8
6.7
Open grid
10
10
3.7
12.6
Open grid
10
20
4.1
15.1
Four room
9
9
2.4
8.4
Four room
15
15
3.3
19.0
Four room
25
25
4.7
45.9
4.4
MAXIMIZING EXTRINSIC REWARD
Finally, while the primary focus of the paper is unsupervised control, we provide a proof-of-principle
experiment that shows that learned policies can help in learning extrinsic reward. We consider the
following situation. An agent is placed in an environment without being told what the objective
is. The agent has an opportunity to explore and learn how to control the environment. After some
amount of time, the agent is told the objective as an extrinsic reward rE, and has a limited amount
of time to collect as much reward as possible. There could be a number of ways to use the learned
policies πp and πq to maximize the extrinsic reward. In our case we simply combine the intrinsic and
extrinsic rewards, and reinforce the policy πp in Algorithm 2 with r = rI + αrE where α is a large
constant (30 in our experiment). We use the 15×15 four room grid world and, after different periods
of time, we place a reward at location 3 × 3. Figure 5 (right) shows the reward collected per episode
after different amounts of unsupervised pre-training or using pure reinforce without the maximum
control objective (red curve). We see that, indeed, the agent learns to collect reward signiﬁcantly
faster after having an opportunity to interact with the environment.
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper we introduce a formalism of intrinsic control maximization for unsupervised option
learning. We presented two algorithms in this framework and analyzed them in a diverse range of
experiments. We demonstrated the importance of closed loop policies for estimating empowerment.
Additionally, we also demonstrated the usefulness of unsupervised learning and intrinsic control for
extrinsic reward maximization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Shakir Mohamed, Frederic Besse, David Siver, Ivo Danihelka, Remi Munos, Ali Eslami,
Tom Schaul, Nicolas Heess and Daniel Polani for useful discussions and comments.
REFERENCES
Suguru Arimoto. An algorithm for computing the capacity of arbitrary discrete memoryless chan-
nels. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 18(1):14–20, 1972.
Pierre-Luc Bacon and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In NIPS Deep Reinforcement
Learning Workshop, 2015.
Marc G Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and
Remi Munos.
Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.01868, 2016.
Richard Blahut. Computation of channel capacity and rate-distortion functions. IEEE transactions
on Information Theory, 18(4):460–473, 1972.
11

Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. Book in preparation for MIT
Press, 2016. URL http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
1735–1780, 1997.
Rein Houthooft, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip De Turck, and Pieter Abbeel. Variational
information maximizing exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.09674, 2016.
Alexander S Klyubin, Daniel Polani, and Chrystopher L Nehaniv. Empowerment: A universal agent-
centric measure of control. In 2005 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, volume 1, pp.
128–135. IEEE, 2005.
Tejas D Kulkarni, Karthik R Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Hierarchical
deep reinforcement learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1604.06057, 2016.
Daniel J Mankowitz, Timothy A Mann, and Shie Mannor. Time-regularized interrupting options. In
Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2014.
Amy McGovern and Andrew G Barto. Automatic discovery of subgoals in reinforcement learning
using diverse density. 2001.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Shakir Mohamed and Danilo Jimenez Rezende. Variational information maximisation for intrinsi-
cally motivated reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp. 2125–2133, 2015.
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Frederic Kaplan, et al. How can we deﬁne intrinsic motivation. In Proc. 8th
Int. Conf. Epigenetic Robot.: Modeling Cogn. Develop. Robot. Syst, 2008.
Christoph Salge, Cornelius Glackin, and Daniel Polani. Empowerment–an introduction. In Guided
Self-Organization: Inception, pp. 67–114. Springer, 2014.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approxima-
tors. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-15), pp.
1312–1320, 2015.
J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Curious model-building control systems. In Neural Networks, 1991. 1991
IEEE International Joint Conference on, pp. 1458–1463. IEEE, 1991.
J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic motivation (1990–2010). IEEE
Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2(3):230–247, 2010.
David Silver and Kamil Ciosek.
Compositional planning using optimal option models.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1206.6473, 2012.
Martin Stolle and Doina Precup.
Learning options in reinforcement learning.
In International
Symposium on Abstraction, Reformulation, and Approximation, pp. 212–223. Springer, 2002.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1. MIT
press Cambridge, 1998.
Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework
for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artiﬁcial intelligence, 112(1):181–211, 1999.
Alexander Vezhnevets, Volodymyr Mnih, John Agapiou, Simon Osindero, Alex Graves, Oriol
Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Strategic attentive writer for learning macro-actions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.04695, 2016.
Christopher John Cornish Hellaby Watkins. Learning from delayed rewards. PhD thesis, University
of Cambridge England, 1989.
12

Paul J Werbos. Advanced forecasting methods for global crisis warning and models of intelligence.
General Systems Yearbook, 22(12):25–38, 1977.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):229–256, 1992.
APPENDIX 1: DERIVATION OF THE VARIATIONAL BOUND ON MUTUAL
INFORMATION
Here we derive the variational bound (3). We drop the indices from variables and drop s0:
I(Ω, s)
=
−
X
Ω
p(Ω) log p(Ω) +
X
Ω,s
p(Ω, s) log p(Ω|s)
(4)
=
−
X
Ω
p(Ω) log p(Ω) +
X
Ω,s
p(Ω, s) log q(Ω|s) +
X
s
p(s|Ω)KL(p|q)
(5)
≥
−
X
Ω
p(Ω) log p(Ω) +
X
Ω,s
p(Ω, s) log q(Ω|s) = IV B(Ω, s).
(6)
APPENDIX 2: DERIVATION OF ALGORITHM 1
Here we show the variational bound (3) again, with parameters θ of pC and parameters φ of q made
explicit:
IV B(Ω, sf|s0) = −
X
Ω
pC
θ (Ω|s0) log pC
θ (Ω|s0) +
X
Ω,sf
pJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC
θ (Ω|s0) log qφ(Ω|s0, sf)
(7)
Taking the gradient with respect to φ is straightforward. We obtain a sample Ω∼pC
θ (Ω|s0) and a
sample of sf by following the policy till termination. Then we can directly take the gradient of log q
which is the gradient of the standard likelihood maximization.
Taking the gradient with respect to θ results in the following:
∇θIV B
=
−
X
Ω
pC
θ (Ω|s0)

−1 −log pC
θ (Ω|s0) +
X
sf
pJ(sf|s0, Ω) log qφ(Ω|s0, sf)

∇θ log pC
θ (Ω|s0)
=
−
X
Ω,sf
pJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC
θ (Ω|s0)
 −1 −log pC
θ (Ω|s0) + log qφ(Ω|s0, sf)

∇θ log pC
θ (Ω|s0).
(8)
Now, we can add any number b(s0) inside the central bracket because the resulting sum is zero:
X
Ω,sf
pJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC
θ (Ω|s0)b(s0)∇θ log pC
θ (Ω|s0)
(9)
=
b(s0)
X
Ω,sf
pJ(sf|s0, Ω)∇θpC
θ (Ω|s0)
(10)
=
b(s0)∇θ
X
Ω
pC
θ (Ω|s0)
(11)
=
b(s0)∇θ1 = 0.
(12)
Thus we obtain
13

∇θIV B
=
−
X
Ω,sf
pJ(sf|s0, Ω)pC
θ (Ω|s0) (rI −b(s0)) ∇θ log pC
θ (Ω|s0)
(13)
rI
=
log qφ(Ω|s0, sf) −log pC
θ (Ω|s0).
(14)
This is the standard policy gradient update (along with its typical derivation): we sample Ω∼
pC
θ (Ω|s0), then pretend as we were training generative model pC on observed Ωby maximum like-
lihood (taking the gradient of log pC), but we multiply (reinforce) the resulting gradient by the
corrected reward (return) rI −b. The baseline b aims to predict rI and is trained by regressing the
values of b towards observed rI. Thus if in a given episode we obtain a larger then expected reward,
the likelihood of generating the same Ωis increased, and vice versa. In this particular case, because
rI is a sampled empowerment at the state s0, b(s0) tends towards the expected empowerment at that
state.
Finally we would like to update the policy. Keeping θ and φ ﬁxed we would like to know how to
change the policy to increase the IV B. In a given sampled experience the value of IV B becomes rI.
We can use any reinforcement learning algorithm to maximize this reward.
APPENDIX 3: FUNCTIONAL FORMS FOR INTRINSIC CONTROL WITH IMPLICIT
OPTIONS
We show the functional forms used in the Algorithm 2 for the policies πp and πq. Let x0, a0, . . . , xf
be a sequence of observations and actions. We assume we have computed embedding u(xf) of the
ﬁnal observation xf. The computations at time step t are the following:
ut
=
RWxt,
(15)
hp
t , cp
t
=
LSTM([hp
t−1, ut, at−1], cp
t−1),
(16)
πp
t
=
softmax(Whp
t ),
(17)
vt
=
RW[ut, uf],
(18)
hq
t, cq
t
=
LSTM([hq
t−1, hp
t , vt, at−1], cq
t−1),
(19)
πq
t
=
softmax(Whq
t),
(20)
where W is a linear operation (including biases that are suppressed from equations for clarity), R
is the rectiﬁer nonlinearity, LSTM equations are below, [a, b, . . .] denotes concatenation of vectors
a, b, . . . and h and c are states of LSTM. The LSTM equations are
h, c
=
LSTM(y, c) :
(21)
bi, bf, bo, bu
=
split(Wy),
(22)
gi
=
σ(bi),
(23)
gf
=
σ(bf),
(24)
go
=
σ(bo),
(25)
u
=
tanh(bu),
(26)
c
=
gfc + giu,
(27)
h
=
tanh(c).
(28)
14

Figure 6: Empowerment in grid world with distractors vs grid world without them for different sizes
and sequence lengths. Distractors move around the environment, the agents sees them but does not
interact with them. The curve shows that the agent learns to completely ignore them and focus on
the controllable part of the environment.
APPENDIX 4: THE EFFECT OF DISTRACTORS ON INTRINSIC CONTROL
Figure 6 displays a graph showing that the agent learns to ignore distractors that do not affect its
intrinsic control. The environment is a grid world with two points that move on a different feature
plane and do not affect the agent, except as a visual distractor. We tested several environment sizes
and option lengths.
15
