SceneSeer: 3D Scene Design with Natural Language
Angel X. Chang, Mihail Eric, Manolis Savva, and Christopher D. Manning
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
{angelx, meric, msavva, manning}@cs.stanford.edu
Generation
right
Inference
Parsing
SceneSeer
Spatial Knowledge Base
3D Scenes
...
3D Models
Text Input
Output 3D Scenes
Refinement with Textual Interactions
Put a clock
on the wall
Put a painting
on the wall
Look at
the painting
Move the painting
to the right
...
...
"There is a living room with 
a red couch and a TV"
1
2
3
4
Relative Positions
Support Hierarchy
Spatial Relations
p(chair|desk)
Figure 1. Illustration of the SCENESEER architecture. Input text is parsed into a scene representation and expanded through inference using knowledge
learned from a corpus of 3D scenes and 3D models. The representation is then used to generate a 3D scene that can be rendered and manipulated
iteratively through textual commands.
ABSTRACT
Designing 3D scenes is currently a creative task that requires
signiﬁcant expertise and effort in using complex 3D design
interfaces. This effortful design process starts in stark con-
trast to the easiness with which people can use language to
describe real and imaginary environments. We present SCE-
NESEER: an interactive text to 3D scene generation system
that allows a user to design 3D scenes using natural lan-
guage.
A user provides input text from which we extract
explicit constraints on the objects that should appear in the
scene. Given these explicit constraints, the system then uses
a spatial knowledge base learned from an existing database
of 3D scenes and 3D object models to infer an arrangement
of the objects forming a natural scene matching the input de-
scription. Using textual commands the user can then itera-
tively reﬁne the created scene by adding, removing, replac-
ing, and manipulating objects. We evaluate the quality of
3D scenes generated by SCENESEER in a perceptual eval-
uation experiment where we compare against manually de-
signed scenes and simpler baselines for 3D scene generation.
We demonstrate how the generated scenes can be iteratively
reﬁned through simple natural language commands.
INTRODUCTION
Designing 3D scenes is a challenging creative task. Expert
users expend considerable effort in learning how to use com-
plex 3D scene design tools. Still, immense manual effort is
required, leading to high costs for producing 3D content in
video games, ﬁlms, interior design, and architectural visual-
ization. Despite the conceptual simplicity of generating pic-
tures from descriptions, systems for text-to-scene generation
have only achieved limited success. How might we allow
people to create 3D scenes using simple natural language?
Current 3D design tools provide a great amount of control
over the construction and precise positioning of geometry
within 3D scenes. However, most of these tools do not al-
low for intuitively assembling a scene from existing objects
which is critical for non-professional users. As an analogue,
in real life few people are carpenters, but most of us have
bought and arranged furniture. For the purposes of deﬁning
how to compose and arrange objects into scenes, natural lan-
guage is an obvious interface. It is much easier to say “Put a
blue bowl on the dining table” rather than retrieving, insert-
ing and orienting a 3D model of a bowl. Text to 3D scene
interfaces can empower a broader demographic to create 3D
scenes for games, interior design, and virtual storyboarding.
Text to 3D scene systems face several technical challenges.
Firstly, natural language is typically terse and incomplete.
People rarely mention many facts about the world since these
facts can often be safely assumed. Most desks are upright
and on the ﬂoor but few people would mention this explicitly.
This implicit spatial knowledge is critical for scene genera-
tion but hard to extract. Secondly, people reason about the
1
arXiv:1703.00050v1  [cs.GR]  28 Feb 2017

world at a much higher level than typical representations of
3D scenes (using the descriptive phrase table against wall vs
a 3D transformation matrix). The semantics of objects and
their approximate arrangement are typically more important
than the precise and abstract properties of geometry. Most
3D scene design tools grew out of the traditions of Computer
Aided Design and architecture where precision of control and
speciﬁcation is much more important than for casual users.
Traditional interfaces allow for comprehensive control but are
typically not concerned with high level semantics.
SCENESEER allows users to generate and manipulate 3D
scenes at the level of everyday semantics through simple nat-
ural language. It leverages spatial knowledge priors learned
from existing 3D scene data to infer implicit, unmentioned
constraints and resolve view-dependent spatial relations in a
natural way. For instance, given the sentence “there is a din-
ing table with a cake”, we can infer that the cake is most likely
on a plate and that the plate is most likely on the table. This
elevation of 3D scene design to the level of everyday seman-
tics is critical for enabling intuitive design interfaces, rapid
prototyping, and coarse-to-ﬁne reﬁnements.
In this paper, we present a framework for the text to 3D
scene task and use it to motivate the design of the SCENE-
SEER system. We demonstrate that SCENESEER can be used
to generate 3D scenes from terse, natural language descrip-
tions. We empirically evaluate the quality of the generated
scenes with a human judgment experiment and ﬁnd that SCE-
NESEER can generate high quality scenes matching the input
text. We show how textual commands can be used interac-
tively in SCENESEER to manipulate generated 3D scenes.
BACKGROUND
3D Design Interfaces
Current research typically focuses on low-level interfaces for
3D modeling. There is much work on input methodologies
and schemes for easing navigation in 3D [14, 15] and ma-
nipulation of primitives such as curves [17]. However, there
is little work on 3D scene manipulation at a semantic level.
Recent work has explored the avenue of parsing natural lan-
guage for design problem deﬁnitions in the context of me-
chanical computer-aided design software [5]. Our motivation
is similar, but we focus on the more open-ended setting of
natural language 3D scene generation and manipulation.
Another line of work focuses on deﬁning higher-level se-
mantic APIs for scripting 3D animations and storyboards [7,
13]. This prior work ﬁnds that people overwhelmingly pre-
fer higher-level manipulation and speciﬁcation in terms of se-
mantic concepts such as “in front”, “to the left” and “on top
of” rather than low level manipulation. The focus of this work
was on deﬁning simple APIs for designing animated stories,
whereas we focus on demonstrating a natural language inter-
face for static 3D scene design. We are closer to early seminal
work in placing simple geometric objects in 3D through tex-
tual commands [6].
More recently, Chaudhuri et al. [4] have demonstrated a novel
3D model design interface where users can control the desired
values of high-level semantic attributes (e.g., “aerodynamic”,
“scary”) to interactively combine object parts. We similarly
allow users high-level semantic control but our focus is on 3D
scenes where manipulating the layout of objects comes with
a different set of challenges compared to object assembly.
Automatic Scene Layout
Recent research in computer graphics has focused on learn-
ing how to automatically lay out 3D scenes given training
data. Prior work on scene layout has focused largely on room
interiors and determining good furniture layouts by optimiz-
ing energy functions that capture the quality of a proposed
layout. These energy functions are encoded from interior de-
sign guidelines [16] or learned from input scene data [10].
Knowledge of object co-occurrences and spatial relations is
represented by simple models such as mixtures of Gaussians
on pairwise object positions and orientations. Methods to
learn scene structure have been demonstrated using various
data sources including simulation of human agents in 3D
scenes [11, 12], and analysis of supporting contact points in
scanned environments [18]. Though SCENESEER is also a
system for generating 3D scenes, it focuses on providing an
interactive natural language interface for this task.
Text to Scene Systems
Early work in textual interfaces for 3D scene manipulation
has addressed simpliﬁed scenarios with micro-worlds con-
sisting of simple geometric shapes. The SHRDLU [20] and
PUT [6] systems were pioneers in parsing natural language
instructions, but generalization of their approach to more re-
alistic scenarios similar to the real world is challenging. More
recent work on the WordsEye system [8, 9] and other similar
approaches [19] has demonstrated more general text-driven
3D scene generation that can handle complex scenes. The
authors compellingly show the beneﬁt of text to scene gener-
ation but note that their systems are restricted due to a lack of
implicit spatial knowledge. As a result, unnatural language,
such as “the stool is 1 feet to the south of the table’,’ must be
used to fully specify the scene.
Most recently, Chang et al. [3] have demonstrated how lin-
guistic and non-linguistic spatial knowledge can be learned
directly from existing scene data and leveraged when parsing
natural language. We build upon this prior work and focus on
interactive scene design where the user does not have to spec-
ify all details of the scene at once, in contrast to prior text to
scene systems such as WordsEye. With SCENESEER the user
can dynamically manipulate a 3D scene with simple textual
commands resembling dialogue systems.
APPROACH OVERVIEW
How might we create an interactive text to 3D scene sys-
tem? The user should be able to describe and manipulate a
scene with concise natural language. To make this possible,
we need to parse the input text to a set of explicitly provided
constraints on objects and their arrangement. We also need
to expand these constraints with implicit “common sense”
facts (e.g., most of the time plates go on tables, not on the
ﬂoor). Once we’ve inferred implicit constraints, we can gen-
erate a candidate scene that can be rendered and viewed by
2

the user for further interactive reﬁnement with textual com-
mands. Based on the systems presented in [2, 3], we frame
the interactive text-to-scene problem in a probabilistic formu-
lation that covers both scene generation and interactive scene
operations. We show how these two previous systems can be
viewed as speciﬁc instantiations of our framework.
SCENESEER relies on a spatial knowledge base that is learned
from a corpus of 3D scenes and 3D models (see Figure 1).
The learning procedure and components of this spatial knowl-
edge base are based on the prior work of Chang et al. [3]
and we use the same corpus of 3D scenes and component
3D models, consisting of about 12,490 mostly indoor objects
with associated textual categories and tags. Our approach for
extracting object relative positions, support hierarchies, sup-
port surfaces, and spatial relations is also based on that of
Chang et al., and is described in more detail in the appendix.
We deﬁne our problem as the task of taking text describing a
scene as input, and generating a plausible 3D scene described
by that text as output. More concretely, based on the input
text, we select objects from a dataset of 3D models and ar-
range them to generate output scenes. See Figure 1 for an
illustration of the system architecture. We break the system
down into several subtasks:
Semantic Parsing: Parse the input textual description of a
concrete scene into a scene template consisting of constraints
on the objects present and spatial relations between them.
Scene Inference: Automatically expand the scene template
to account for implicit constraints not speciﬁed in the text.
Scene Generation: Using the above scene template and prior
knowledge on the spatial arrangement of objects, sample the
template, select a set of objects to be instantiated, and opti-
mize their arrangement into a scene.
Scene Interaction: Allow user to interactively adjust the
scene through direct manipulation and textual commands.
This breakdown is useful for tackling the hard problem of
text-to-scene and allows us to address subproblems indepen-
dently or jointly. We choose this breakdown as it provides a
separation between subproblems that fall within the graphics,
NLP, and interaction design communities.
Representation
There is a big gap between the representations typically used
for 3D object and scene rendering, and the high-level seman-
tics that people assign to scenes. Here we deﬁne a scene
template representation following Chang et al. [3]’s approach
to make explicit the information necessary for connecting
higher-level semantics to the lower-level geometric represen-
tations. Since natural language usually expresses high-level
semantics, we can view the text-to-scene task as a problem of
ﬁrst extracting a higher-level scene template representation
and then mapping into a concrete geometric representation.
Scene Template
A scene template t = (O, C, Cs) consists of a set of ob-
ject descriptions O = {o1, . . . , on} and constraints C =
{c1, . . . , ck} on the relationships between the objects.
A
scene template also has a scene type Cs. This provides a
high-level yet unambiguous representation of scene structure.
Each object oi, has properties associated with it such as cat-
egory label, basic attributes such as color and material, and
number of occurrences in the scene. For constraints, we focus
on spatial relations between objects, expressed as predicates
of the form supported by(oi, oj) or left(oi, oj) where oi and
oj are recognized objects.
Geometric Scene
We refer to the concrete geometric representation of a scene
as a “geometric scene”. A geometric scene s consists of a
set of 3D model instances {i1, . . . , in} where each model
instance ij = (mj, Tj) is represented by model mj in the
model database and the transformation matrix Tj. The model
represents the physical appearance (geometry and texture) of
the object while the transformation matrix encodes the posi-
tion, orientation, and scaling of the object. Working directly
with such low-level representations of scenes is unnatural for
people, which is a factor in the difﬁculty of learning current
3D scene design interfaces. We generate a geometric scene
from a scene template by selecting appropriate models from
a 3D model database and determining transformations that
optimize their layout to satisfy spatial constraints.
Model Formulation
We take a probabilistic view and model the task as that of es-
timating the distribution of possible scenes P(s|u) given the
input utterance u. This allows us to incorporate prior knowl-
edge to perform inference, and to leverage recent advances
in machine learning for learning from data. The distribution
P(s|u) can be sampled from to generate plausible scenes to
present to the user.
We can further decompose P(s|u) into:
P(s|u) = P(t|u)P(t′|t, u)P(s|t′, t, u)
where P(t|u) is the probability of a scene template t given
a utterance u, and t′ is a completed scene template. In our
pipelined system, we will assume that s is independent of t, u
and that t′ is independent of u to get
P(s|u) = P(t|u)P(t′|t)P(s|t′)
A more sophisticated system would jointly estimate P(s|u).
In our framework, Semantic Parsing corresponds to estimat-
ing P(t|u), Scene Inference to estimating P(t′|t), and Scene
Generation to estimating P(s|t′). The deterministic parsing
model of Chang et al. [3] represents P(t|u) as a delta proba-
bility at the selected t.
We decompose scene generation into two parts: Object Se-
lection and Scene Layout. Object selection consists of iden-
tifying a likely set of models {mj} from our model database
given a complete scene template t. Scene layout is the prob-
lem of arranging the objects and ﬁnding appropriate trans-
forms {Tj} for the models {mj} and scene template t.
P(s|t) = P({mj}|t)P({mj, Tj}|{mj}, t)
3

Again, a more sophisticated system may choose to estimate
P(s|t) jointly. Note that in the equation above, {mj} de-
notes the set of all models and {mj, Tj} denotes the set of all
model, transformation matrix tuples (mj, Tj).
To further simplify the problem, we assume that we can select
the model for each object independently. Thus, we have
P({mj}|t) =
Y
j
P(mj|oj)
This assumption clearly does not hold for many scenes and
scene templates (e.g., matching furniture sets).
For scene layout, we estimate P({mj, Tj}|{mj}, t) using a
layout score L described in more detail in the Appendix.
To support Scene Interactions, we follow a similar model,
except now we are given a starting scene s and an utterance u,
and we want to determine the desired scene s′. We can model
this as estimating P(s′|s, u). For simplicity, we will assume
that the utterance consist of one scene operation O that takes s
and transforms it to s′. Thus we can break down P(s′|s, u) =
P(s′|O, s, u)P(O|s, u). Here, given a speciﬁc starting scene
s and the utterance u expressing a desired operation, we want
to ﬁnd the operation O that can be applied on s to yield s′.
This problem can be decomposed into parsing, inference and
generation steps that we use for regular scene generation as
well. The difference is that we now estimate an operation O.
SEMANTIC PARSING
During semantic parsing we take the input text and create a
scene template that identiﬁes the objects and the relations be-
tween them. We follow the approach of Chang et al. [3] to
process the input text using the Stanford CoreNLP pipeline1,
identify visualizable objects, physical properties of the ob-
jects, and extract dependency patterns for spatial relations be-
tween the objects. The parsed text is then deterministically
mapped to the scene template or scene operations. An inter-
esting avenue for future research is to automatically learn how
to map text using more advanced semantic parsing methods.
SCENE INFERENCE
After we obtain a scene template with the explicitly stated
constraints, we expand it to include inferred objects and im-
plicit constraints. As an example, for each object in the scene,
we use the support hierarchy prior Psupport to ﬁnd the most
likely supporting parent object category. If there is no such
parent object already in the scene, we add it to the scene. For
instance, given the objects “computer” and “room”, we infer
that there should also be a “desk” supporting the “computer”.
In addition to inferring missing objects, we infer the static
support hierarchy for the objects in the scene. For each ob-
ject, we ﬁrst identify support constraints that must exist based
on the scene template. For any objects that do not have a sup-
porting parent, we sample Psupport(Cp|Cc) restricted to the set
of available object categories. In addition, we can infer miss-
ing objects based on the location (for instance, a bedroom
typically contains a bed and a dresser). Future work would
1http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/corenlp.shtml
Figure 2. Generated scene for “There is a sandwich on a plate.” Note
that the room, table and other objects are not explicitly stated, but are
inferred by the system.
involve enhancing this component with improved inference
by identifying what objects must exist for each location, in-
stead of sampling a random selection of objects. We can also
consider additional contextual details such as the distinction
between a messy desk with a variety of items versus a tidy
desk with few items.
SCENE GENERATION
Once we have a complete scene template we need to select 3D
models to represent the objects trying to match any described
attributes, and to arrange the models in the scene based on
constraints. During this step we aim to ﬁnd the most likely
scene given the scene template and prior spatial knowledge.
Object Selection We use the keywords associated with each
object to query the model database. We select randomly from
the top 10 results for variety and to allow the user to regen-
erate the scene with different models. This step can be en-
hanced to take into account correlations between objects (e.g.,
a lamp on a table should not be a ﬂoor lamp model).
Object Layout Given the selected models, the source scene
template, and priors on spatial relations, we ﬁnd an arrange-
ment of the objects within the scene that maximizes the prob-
ability of the layout under the given scene template.
In order to compute how well the layout satisﬁes the con-
straints given by the scene template, we parameterize the lay-
out of each object using semantically meaningful attributes:
support parent parentsup, support surface surfsup, attachment
surface surfatt, position on support surface possup, orientation
θ, size σ. These semantic attributes allow us to do higher
level reasoning and interactions with the object.
We use a sampling approach to determine the position, ori-
entation, and size of objects within the scene. We ﬁrst tra-
verse the support hierarchy in depth-ﬁrst order, positioning
the largest available child node and recursing. Child nodes
are positioned by ﬁrst selecting a supporting surface surfsup
on a candidate parent object through sampling of Psurfsup. Us-
ing Psurfatt, we ﬁnd the most appropriate child attachment sur-
4

There is a desk and a computer.
There is a living room with a red couch and a TV.
There is a desk with a chair and a poster.
On the desk there is a red stapler.
Figure 3. Several example generated scenes for three different input descriptions.
Verb
Operation
Example text
Example parse
Inﬂuenced parameters
select
Select
select the chair on the right of the table
Select({lamp},{right(lamp,table)})
Sel
look,look at
LookAt
look at the lamp
LookAt({lamp})
Cam
add,insert,place,put
Insert
add a lamp to the table
Insert({lamp},{on(lamp,table)})
+object
delete,remove
Remove
remove the lamp
Remove({lamp})
−object
replace
Replace
replace the lamp with a vase
Replace({lamp},{vase})
+object, −object
move, place, put
Move
move the chair to the left
Move({chair},{left(chair)})
pos, parentsup, surfsup
enlarge, shrink
Scale
enlarge the bowl
Scale({bowl})(1.5)
σ
Table 1. Scene operations deﬁned for our system. The natural language verbs are parsed to speciﬁc operations and subsets of the scene parameters are
modiﬁed accordingly (last column).
face surfatt and orient the child node accordingly. We then
sample possible placements (possup, θ, σ) on surfsup, ensuring
that the node is not overhanging and there are no collisions
with other objects. Each sampled placement is scored with
L. The resulting scene is rendered and presented to the user.
Figure 2 shows a generated scene along with the support hier-
archy and input text. Even though the room, table, and other
objects were not explicitly mentioned in the input, we infer
that the plate is likely to be supported by a table and that there
likely to be other objects on the table. Without this inference,
the user would need to be much more verbose with text such
as “There is a room with a table, a plate, and a sandwich. The
sandwich is on the plate, and the plate is on the table.”
Figure 3 shows several examples illustrating how we can gen-
erate many 3D scenes for the user to select from. Our system
can infer many unstated but implicitly present objects (e.g.,
monitors are placed on the desks for functional computer
setups). We can generate high quality scenes for localized
arrangements such as the computer desks, for which there
are many examples in the training 3D scene corpus. How-
ever, more complex scenes such as the living rooms exhibit
some unnatural object positioning (e.g., TV does not face the
couch). For such cases, it is important to allow users to itera-
tively reﬁne the generated scene.
SCENE INTERACTIONS
Once a scene is generated, the user can view the scene and
manipulate it using both textual commands and mouse inter-
action. The system supports traditional 3D scene interaction
mechanisms such as navigating the viewpoint with mouse and
keyboard, and selection and movement of object models by
clicking. In addition, a user can give simple textual com-
mands to select and modify objects, or to reﬁne the scene.
To allow the user to interact with a generated scene via text,
we deﬁne a set of high-level semantic operations for scene
manipulation. These are higher level operations than typi-
cally found in traditional scene editing software. Again, the
text is treated as a set of constraints that we want the revised
scene to satisfy, while trying to keep the revised scene as sim-
ilar to the original scene as possible. More formally, given the
original scene S and a scene operation O, we want to ﬁnd the
scene S′ which is most similar to S, while still satisfying the
constraints imposed by O.
To track the other elements of the scene, we maintain a scene
state Z = (S, Sel, Cam) that consists of the scene S, the set
of selected objects Sel, and the camera position Cam. Each
operation can be deﬁned as a function O : Z →Z′. We
support several basic operations: Select changes the set of
selected objects, Insert adds objects into the scene, Delete
removes objects from the scene, Replace replaces objects in
the scene with new objects, operations such as Move and
Scale modify constraints on existing objects without chang-
ing the set of objects in the scene. LookAt repositions the
camera to focus on the selected objects. Table 1 summarizes
the operations supported by our system. These basic opera-
tions demonstrate some simple scene manipulations through
natural language. This set of operations can be extended, for
example, to cover manipulation of parts of objects (“make the
seat of the chair red”).
To interpret a textual scene interaction command, the system
ﬁrst parses the input text u into sequence of scene operations
(O1, . . . , Ok), identifying the resulting set of constraints that
should hold. For each parsed scene operation Oi, the system
5

Figure 4. Left: initial scene. Right: after input “Look at vase”, the cam-
era zooms to the ﬂower vase and the vase is selected (green highlight).
then executes the scene operation by resolving the set of ob-
jects on which the operation should be performed and then
modifying the scene state accordingly.
Command Parsing We deterministically map verbs to possi-
ble actions as shown in Table 1. Multiple actions are possi-
ble for some verbs (e.g., “place” and “put” can refer to either
Move or Insert). To differentiate, we assume new objects
are introduced with the indeﬁnite article “a” whereas old ones
are modiﬁed with the deﬁnite article “the”.
Object Resolution To allow interaction with the scene, we
must resolve references to objects within a scene. Objects are
disambiguated by category and view-centric spatial relations.
In addition to matching objects by their categories, we use
the WordNet hierarchy to handle hyponym or hypernym ref-
erents. Depending on the current view, spatial relations such
as “left” or “right” can refer to different objects.
Camera Positioning For the LookAt command, we ﬁrst
identify the set of objects being referred to. Given an ut-
terance u of the form “look at X”, we get the set of objects
that are the most likely referent Sel = arg maxo∈S P(o|X).
We perform a simple viewpoint optimization where we sam-
ple camera positions c and ﬁnd the position that maximizes a
view function f(c), giving us Campos = arg maxc f(c).
Camera positions are sampled from 12 equally spaced points
around the up-axis of the selected objects and at a ﬁxed height
slightly above the bounding box of the objects. The camera is
targeted at the centroid point of the selected objects. The view
function we use is: f(c) = visSel(c) + b(scrSel(c)) + visall(c)
where visSel is the number of selected objects visible, visall
is the percentage of all objects visible, and b is a function
of scrSel2, the percent of the screen that is taken up by the
selected objects.
This is a simple approach for camera positioning which is
challenging to perform manually for novice users of 3D de-
sign software and yet critical for navigating and interacting
with the environment.
Scene Modiﬁcation Based on the operation, we modify the
scene by maximizing the probability of a new scene template
given the requested action and previous scene template.
The set of objects in the scene is modiﬁed according to the
operation:
2linear ramp from b(0.2) = 0 to b(0.4) = 1
Figure 5. Examples of Replace operation. Top: “Replace the bowl with
a red lamp”. Middle: “Replace the table with a coffee table”. Bottom:
“Replace the table with a round table”.
• Insert: Select a new object that satisﬁes the constraints
from the model database and place it in the scene.
• Replace: Select a new object that satisﬁes the constraints
from the model database and replace the objects to be re-
placed with the new object.
• Delete: Remove the old objects from the scene.
After the set of objects is determined, relayout is performed
on the scene by attempting to satisfy the constraints while
minimizing the change in position for all unmodiﬁed objects.
For operations such as Move and Scale the set of objects re-
main the same but their position or size will need to change to
satisfy the new constraints. When doing relayout, we do not
vary all parameters, but just the set of inﬂuenced parameters
for the operation (see Table 1).
Depending on the operation, operand objects, and their scene
context, the resulting changes in the scene vary in complex-
ity. The simplest operations only inﬂuence the target objects
while more complex operations require adjustment of sup-
ported objects or even surrounding objects. Figure 5 shows
examples of the Replace operation with varying complexity.
Replacing the bowl on the table with a table lamp is relatively
easy since the system only needs to ensure the attachment
point remains the same. However, when we replace the table
with a coffee table in Figure 5 (middle), the bowl needs to be
repositioned. In the bottom row of the ﬁgure we see a fail-
ure case due to the layout algorithm since the chairs are not
repositioned to accommodate the bigger round table. Instead
the table is pushed to the side to avoid collisions. Manually
performing a replace operation can be extremely tedious due
to such object position dependencies, thus making this a valu-
able high-level operation. This illustrates how our approach
attempts to bridge the semantic gap between high-level intent
and low-level geometric manipulation. In our implementa-
tion, the scene operations are initiated by the user using text
commands. It is also possible to incorporate these operations
into a graphical user interface. For instance, Replace can be
implemented in a GUI as a sequence of clicks to select an ob-
6

1: There is a living room
with a red couch and a TV.
2: Put a rug in the room.
4: Enlarge the rug.
3: Move the rug to the back.
Figure 6. A sequence of textual interactions ro reﬁne a living room scene
by adding a rug and manipulating it.
ject, search from a model database, select a desired model to
use as a replacement.
Scene Reﬁnement
With the set of high-level operations that we deﬁned, a user
can progressively reﬁne a generated scene. Figure 6 shows a
sequence of operations for adding a rug to the living room we
generated earlier. Combined with traditional mouse and key-
board navigation, these textual interactions allow high-level
scene editing operations that are interpreted within the current
viewing context (e.g., moving the rug to the back of the room
from the viewer’s perspective in the third panel). Without
such high-level operations, the necessary interaction would
include several steps to ﬁnd a rug model, place it, orient it,
and manually adjust its position.
GENERATED SCENE EVALUATION
We evaluate the output of our system by asking people to
judge how well generated scenes match given input descrip-
tions. This is an appropriate initial evaluation since in a prac-
tical usage scenario, a scene matching the input description
well would provide a good starting point for further reﬁne-
ment. We compare versions of our system contrasting the
beneﬁt of different components. We also establish an upper-
bound baseline by asking people to manually design scenes
corresponding to the same descriptions, using a simple scene
design interface used in prior work [10].
Conditions
We compare seven conditions: basic, +sup, +sup+spat,
+sup+prior, full, full+infer, and human.
The
basic condition is a simple layout approach which does not
use any learned support, spatial relation, or placement priors.
Figure 7. Screenshot from our evaluation experiment. Participants were
asked to rate how well the displayed scenes match the description on a
7-point Likert scale.
The conditions +sup, +sup+spat, and +sup+prior,
and full (which includes all three priors) test the bene-
ﬁt of adding these learned priors to the system.
Finally,
full+infer performs implicit inference for selecting and
laying out additional objects, while human consists of the
manually designed 3D scenes that people created given the
descriptions. For each of these conditions we create a set of
50 scenes, one for each of the input textual descriptions. In to-
tal, we have 350 stimulus scene-description pairs to be rated
by people during our experiment (see Figure 8 for example
descriptions and scenes).
Participants
Participants were recruited online on Amazon Mechanical
Turk and were required to be ﬂuent speakers of English. We
recruited a total of 97 participants for evaluating the quality
of generated scenes with respect to reference textual descrip-
tions. For the human condition, the scenes were created by
a different set of 50 participants who were given the textual
descriptions and asked to create a corresponding scene (see
last column of Figure 8).
Procedure
During the experiment, a randomly sampled set of 30 pairs
of generated scene and input textual descriptions were shown
to each participant. The pairs were drawn from all condi-
tions and present in randomized order. The participants were
asked to rate each pair on a 7-point Likert scale to indicate
“how well the scene matches the description”, with a score
of 1 indicating a very bad match, and 7 indicating a very
good match.
The participants were instructed to consider
three points in particular: (1) Are the objects mentioned in
the description included in the scene? (2) Are the described
relationships between the objects correct in the scene? and (3)
Overall, does the scene ﬁt the description? Figure 7 shows a
screenshot of the UI that we used to carry out the experiment.
Design
The experiment was a within-subjects factorial design with
the condition {basic, +sup, +sup+spat, +sup+prior,
7

description
basic
full
+sup
full+infer
There is a desk 
and a chair.
human
There is a table 
and there are 
four chairs. There 
are four plates 
and there are 
four sandwiches.
Figure 8. Some example textual descriptions and scenes generated by SCENESEER in different conditions, as well as scenes manually designed by
people.
condition
mean rating
basic
3.61
+sup
4.22
+sup+spat
4.72
+sup+prior
4.90
full
5.03
full+infer
4.65
human
5.89
Table 2. Average scene-description match ratings for each of the condi-
tions in our experiment.
full, full+infer, human}, description {1...50}, and
participant {1...97} as factors.
The Likert rating for
description-to-scene match was the dependent measure.
Results
In total the 97 participants gave 2910 scene ratings for the 350
stimulus scene-description pairs with 8.39 ratings on average
per pair (standard deviation was 3.56 ratings).
Generated scene ratings
The mean ratings for each condition in our experiment are
summarized in Table 2 and the rating distributions are plot-
ted in Figure 9. We see that the basic condition receives
the lowest average rating, while predictably the scenes de-
signed by people receive the highest rating. Adding learned
support, spatial relation parsing, and priors for relative posi-
tion improve the rating for the scenes generated by our sys-
tem, and the full combined condition receives the highest
average rating. We note that the scenes generated with ad-
ditional inferred objects (full+infer) actually receive a
lower rating. We hypothesize that two factors may contribute
to the lower rating for full+infer. Firstly, adding extra
objects makes the scene layout more complicated and prone
to exhibiting object selection or spatial relation errors. Sec-
ondly, inferred objects are not explicitly mentioned in the de-
scription so participants may not have viewed them as signif-
icantly improving the quality of the scene (though they were
instructed to consider additional objects positively if they add
naturally to the appearance of the scene).
Condition
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Rating
basic
+sup
+sup+spat
+sup+prior
full
full+infer
human
Figure 9. Distributions of scene-description match ratings for experi-
ment conditions. The dark and light regions delineate the lower and
upper quartile respectively, and the whiskers extend to 150% of the in-
terquartile range.
Statistical analysis
The statistical signiﬁcance of the effect of the condition factor
on the ratings was determined using a mixed effects model,
with the condition as a ﬁxed effect and the participant and
description as random effects, since the latter two are drawn
randomly from a large pool of potential participants and de-
scriptions3.
Most pairwise differences between conditions
for mean scene rating were signiﬁcant under Wilcoxon rank-
sum tests with the Bonferroni-Holm correction (p<0.05).
The exceptions are the comparisons between +sup+spat,
+sup+prior and full which were not signiﬁcant.
Summary
The experimental results show that SCENESEER can generate
plausible 3D scenes given input descriptions. The different
components of the system that leverage learned support rela-
tions, spatial relationship parsing, and relative position priors
all contribute towards improving the quality of the generated
scenes. Implicitly inferred additional objects do not improve
the scene-to-description match ratings given by people.
DISCUSSION
Limitations
The unoptimized implementation of our system takes sev-
eral seconds to parse, infer and generate a scene, depending
3We used the lme4 R package and optimized for maximum log-
likelihood [1].
8

mostly on the number of objects and relations expressed in the
input. Unfortunately, this makes interactive use slow in prac-
tical settings. However, the system can be easily optimized to
within the range of real-time editing. A more important limi-
tation, is that we currently handle a limited domain of scenes.
Parsing of scene descriptions with existing natural language
processing methods is error-prone even for simple, everyday
language, and the publicly available 3D model datasets are
biased towards furniture and electronics, limiting the types of
potential output scenes (e.g., “the ﬂower garden outside the
window” is a challenging case). Furthermore, generation of
scenes with more organic, complex object geometry is chal-
lenging for our simplistic layout approach, and we have ig-
nored the importance of stylistic consistency in object selec-
tion (e.g., different styles of chairs selected for same table).
The current set of operations that we presented is constrained
to fairly simple manipulations of the scene. An improved sys-
tem would be able to process more complex interactions that
require a deeper semantic understanding of the world. For ex-
ample: “move the TV to face the couch” (requires knowledge
of front sides and facing orientations), and “put a bowl of fruit
on the second shelf of the bookcase” (requires knowledge of
object parts and relative ordering from bottom).
We have not explored the design choices in combining a high-
level natural language interface such as SCENESEER with di-
rect manipulation is an interesting avenue for future research.
Different operations might be more efﬁcient to perform in one
modality or the other, depending also on the particular scene
context and viewpoint. Measuring the relative beneﬁts of dif-
ferent combination strategies in speciﬁc tasks is an interesting
avenue for future research.
Future Work
A promising direction for future work is to integrate systems
such as SCENESEER with speech to text systems allowing
for voice-driven and more natural dialogue interactions. This
could be particularly relevant in the context of increasingly
popular virtual and augmented reality systems where text in-
put is more cumbersome.
Leveraging the interactive nature of the system to improve
spatial knowledge is an exciting avenue for future work. For
instance, by observing where the user decides to manually
place objects, we can improve our placement priors. A nat-
ural way for the user to provide feedback and corrections to
system errors is through a dialogue-based interaction extend-
ing the imperative textual commands.
Another exciting direction for future work is to crowdsource
the accumulation of spatial knowledge by scaling the system
on web-based platforms. This will also provide an opportu-
nity for broader user studies that can give insight into context-
speciﬁc preferences for text versus direct manipulation inter-
actions, and provide useful data for informing the design of
future text-to-scene systems.
CONCLUSION
We presented SCENESEER, a text to 3D scene generation
system with semantically-aware textual interactions for iter-
ative 3D scene design. We evaluated the scenes generated
by our system through a human judgment experiment and
conﬁrmed that we can generate scenes that match the input
textual descriptions and approach the quality of manually de-
signed scenes. We demonstrated that automatically generated
3D scenes can be used as starting points for iterative reﬁne-
ment through a set of high-level textual commands. Natural
language commands are a promising mode of interaction for
3D scene design tasks since they abstract much of the tedium
of low level manipulation. In this way, we can bridge the se-
mantic gap between high-level user intent and low-level geo-
metric operations for 3D scene design.
We believe that the domain of text to 3D scene design presents
many challenging research problems at the intersection of
computer graphics, HCI, and natural language processing.
Our system presents a small step in the direction of enabling
natural language interfaces for scene design. We believe that
in the future, dialogue-based systems will make the scene de-
sign process as effortless as telling a story.
REFERENCES
1. Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., and Bates, D. M.
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of memory and language
(2008).
2. Chang, A. X., Savva, M., and Manning, C. D. Interactive
learning of spatial knowledge for text to 3D scene
generation. In Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop
on Interactive Language Learning, Visualization, and
Interfaces (ACL-ILLVI) (2014).
3. Chang, A. X., Savva, M., and Manning, C. D. Learning
spatial knowledge for text to 3D scene generation. In
EMNLP (2014).
4. Chaudhuri, S., Kalogerakis, E., Giguere, S., and
Funkhouser, T. AttribIt: Content Creation with Semantic
Attributes. In UIST (2013).
5. Cheong, H., Li, W., Shu, L., Tessier, A., Bradner, E., and
Iorio, F. Natural language problem deﬁnition for
computer-aided mechanical design. In CHI-DSLI
Workshop 2014 Conference Proceedings (2014).
6. Clay, S. R., and Wilhelms, J. Put: Language-based
interactive manipulation of objects. Computer Graphics
and Applications (1996).
7. Conway, M., Audia, S., Burnette, T., Cosgrove, D., and
Christiansen, K. Alice: lessons learned from building a
3D system for novices. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
ACM (2000), 486–493.
8. Coyne, B., and Sproat, R. WordsEye: an automatic
text-to-scene conversion system. In SIGGRAPH (2001).
9. Coyne, R. E., Klapheke, A., Rouhizadeh, M., Sproat, R.,
and Bauer, D. Annotation tools and knowledge
representation for a text-to-scene system.
9

10. Fisher, M., Ritchie, D., Savva, M., Funkhouser, T., and
Hanrahan, P. Example-based synthesis of 3D object
arrangements. SIGGRAPH Asia (2012).
11. Jiang, Y., Lim, M., and Saxena, A. Learning object
arrangements in 3D scenes using human context. In
ICML (2012).
12. Jiang, Y., and Saxena, A. Inﬁnite latent conditional
random ﬁelds for modeling environments through
humans. RSS (2013).
13. Kelleher, C., and Pausch, R. Lessons learned from
designing a programming system to support middle
school girls creating animated stories. In Visual
Languages and Human-Centric Computing, 2006.
VL/HCC 2006. IEEE Symposium on, IEEE (2006),
165–172.
14. Khan, A., Mordatch, I., Fitzmaurice, G., Matejka, J., and
Kurtenbach, G. Viewcube: a 3D orientation indicator
and controller. In Proceedings of the 2008 symposium on
Interactive 3D graphics and games, ACM (2008),
17–25.
15. McCrae, J., Mordatch, I., Glueck, M., and Khan, A.
Multiscale 3D navigation. In Proceedings of the 2009
symposium on Interactive 3D graphics and games, ACM
(2009), 7–14.
16. Merrell, P., Schkufza, E., Li, Z., Agrawala, M., and
Koltun, V. Interactive furniture layout using interior
design guidelines. In SIGGRAPH (2011).
17. Owen, R., Kurtenbach, G., Fitzmaurice, G., Baudel, T.,
and Buxton, B. When it gets more difﬁcult, use both
hands: exploring bimanual curve manipulation. In
Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2005, Canadian
Human-Computer Communications Society (2005),
17–24.
18. Rosman, B., and Ramamoorthy, S. Learning spatial
relationships between objects. IJRR (2011).
19. Seversky, L. M., and Yin, L. Real-time automatic 3D
scene generation from natural language voice and text
descriptions. In Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM
international conference on Multimedia (2006).
20. Winograd, T. Understanding natural language. Cognitive
psychology (1972).
APPENDIX
Scene Layout Score
The scene layout score is given by L = λobjLobj + λrelLrel, a
weighted sum of object arrangement Lobj score and constraint
satisfaction Lrel score following from Chang et al. [3]’s deﬁ-
nition:
Lobj
=
X
oi
Psurf(Sn|Coi)
X
oj∈F (oi)
Prelpos(·)
Lrel
=
X
ci
Prel(ci)
where F(oi) are the sibling objects and parent object of oi.
We use λobj = 0.25 and λrel = 0.75 for the results we present.
Spatial Knowledge Priors
We use similar deﬁnitions for spatial knowledge priors as
those presented by Chang et al. [3] with updated support and
attachment surface priors. Spatial knowledge priors are esti-
mated using observations in scenes. To handle data sparsity
we utilize our category taxonomy. If there are fewer than
k = 5 support observations we back off to a parent category
in the taxonomy for more informative priors.
Object Occurrence Priors
Occurrence priors are given by simple Bayesian statistics of
objects occurring in scenes: Pocc(Co|Cs) = count(Co in Cs)
count(Cs)
Support Hierarchy Priors
We estimate the probability of a parent category Cp sup-
porting a given child category Cc as a simple condi-
tional probability based on normalized observation counts:
Psupport(Cp|Cc) = count(Cc on Cp)
count(Cc)
Support and Attachment Surface Priors
Similarly, the parent support surface priors are given by:
Psurfsup(s|Cc) = count(Cc on surface with s)
count(Cc)
The parent supporting
surface is featurized using the surface normal (up, down, hor-
izontally) and whether the surface is interior (facing in) or
exterior (facing out). For instance, a room has a ﬂoor which
is an upwards interior supporting surface:
The
child
attachment
surface
priors
are
given
by:
Psurfatt(s|Cc)
=
count(Cc attached at surface s)
count(Cc)
Object attach-
ment surfaces are featurized using the bounding box side:
top, bottom, front, back, left, or right. For instance, posters
are attached on their back side to walls, rugs are attached on
their bottom side to ﬂoors.
If there are no observations available we use the model ge-
ometry to determine the support and attachment surface. For
support surfaces we pick only upward facing surfaces, while
for attachment we assume 3D (blocky) objects are attached on
the bottom, ﬂat objects are attached on their back or bottom,
and thin objects are attached on their side.
Relative Position Priors
We model the relative positions of objects based on their ob-
ject categories and current scene type: i.e., the relative po-
sition of an object of category Cobj is with respect to an-
other object of category Cref and for a scene type Cs. We
condition on the relationship R between the two objects,
whether they are siblings (R = Sibling) or child-parent
(R = ChildParent), and deﬁne the relative position prior as:
Prelpos(x, y, θ|Cobj, Cref, Cs, R) which we estimate using ker-
nel density estimation.
10
