LACUNA: Safe Agents as Recursive Program Holes
Yaoyu Zhao*
Yichen Xu*
Oliver Braˇcevac
Cao Nguyen Pham
Frank Zhengqing Wu
Martin Odersky
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{yaoyu.zhao, yichen.xu, oliver.bracevac,
nguyen.pham, zhengqing.wu, martin.odersky}@epfl.ch
Abstract
LLM agents increasingly act by writing code,
yet a split persists between the runtime that
drives the agent and the code the model writes.
The runtime owns the loop, context, and con-
trol flow, and the model has little say over any
of them. Letting model-written code shape the
runtime itself would make agents more expres-
sive, but it would also sharpen safety problems.
A model can be diverted by a prompt injec-
tion, call the wrong tool, or fail partway and
leave an inconsistent state, and each such fail-
ure reaches further when the code shapes the
runtime than when it expresses a single action.
We present LACUNA, a programming model
for agents that closes this split while preserv-
ing safety. Each agent action is a typed call
agent[T](task) that the LLM fills with code
when execution reaches it, and the code is type-
checked against the surrounding program be-
fore it runs. Because each action is accepted or
rejected as a whole, a rejected one leaves the en-
vironment untouched, and its compiler diagnos-
tics drive a retry. The same check also bounds
which tools and data an action may use and how
they flow. Our primitive expresses ReAct loops,
sub-agents, skills, parallel decomposition, and
multi-model planning as ordinary control flow.
We evaluate LACUNA on a collection of test
cases, BrowseComp-Plus, and τ 2-bench. On
BrowseComp-Plus, 8.6% of generations are re-
jected before execution, with 0.7 retries per
query on average, and the agent reaches 27.1%
accuracy. On τ 2-bench, LACUNA solves 76.0%
of 392 tasks across four domains with a capable
model, on par with the baseline agent.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) increasingly drive
agents: programs that call models, use tools, and
maintain state to solve tasks. Tools such as file
access, web search, and API calls are now often de-
scribed through protocols such as MCP (Anthropic,
*Equal contribution.
2024) and packaged as reusable skills (Anthropic,
2025c). The dominant approach, ReAct (Yao et al.,
2023), has the model alternate between reasoning
and individual tool calls until reaching an answer.
Code-as-action agents (Wang et al., 2024b; An-
thropic, 2025b; Roucher et al., 2025) offer an alter-
native: instead of emitting one tool call at a time,
the model writes code that composes tools, parses
intermediate results, branches, and loops.
Existing code-as-action agents keep a clear split
between the code that runs the agent and the code
it writes. The runtime owns the loop, context, and
action dispatch, while the model supplies only the
next fragment, with little say over what context to
keep, when to spawn sub-agents, or how to adapt
control flow. Recursive language modeling (Zhang
et al., 2025a) lets generated code update a persis-
tent execution context and call the model again,
but the runtime still owns the loop and call struc-
ture. Letting the code the model writes shape the
runtime itself lifts these limits and makes agents
more expressive, but it also raises the stakes for
safety. Model-written code is untrusted. When it
only expresses actions, the surrounding runtime
bounds its reach; once the agent shapes its own
runtime, an attack reaches the runtime itself. Ex-
isting defenses are piecemeal. Sandboxes and re-
stricted interpreters (Pydantic, 2025) limit what
code can do at runtime, policy languages (Ama-
zon Web Services, 2024) gate access to resources,
and input-hardening and mediation defenses (Chen
et al., 2025a; Willison, 2023) try to block unsafe
actions. None of them checks a whole generated
action before it starts.
We propose LACUNA, a programming model
that closes this split while preserving safety. Each
agent action is a typed hole that the LLM fills with
code when execution reaches it, and the code is
type-checked against the surrounding program be-
fore it runs. The core idea is to put the model call
inside the program at the point where its result
1
arXiv:2605.28617v1 [cs.AI] 27 May 2026

is needed, and to make the caller state what kind
of result is expected. Our prototype uses Scala 3
because it supports the two foundations we need:
compiling a fresh snippet in the surrounding pro-
gram context, and tracking which resources that
snippet is allowed to use (Scala, 2024a). The user-
facing call is:
def agent[T](task: String): T
Here task is the natural-language prompt and T is
the expected result type. When execution reaches
this call, the model writes Scala code for the re-
quest, which LACUNA compiles at the same point
in the surrounding program, so it can use the vari-
ables, functions, and tools available there. If the
code provably produces a value of type T, it runs;
otherwise the compiler’s errors are sent back as
feedback for a retry.
The generated code is ordinary Scala, not just a
single tool call. It can use tools, process data, and
ask the model for help again, as in this request for
a report over several topics:
val topics = List(
"LLM", "world models", "transformer", ...)
val report =
agent[String](
"Research each topic and generate a" +
" report on their connections.")
typed action
One valid expansion uses nested research calls:
val report: String =
val findings =
topics.par.map(topic =>
agent[String](s"Research: $topic"))
agent("Generate a report from the findings")
recursive expansion
Each nested call is checked like the outer one, with
its own result type and access to the variables intro-
duced by the code around it. Recursive model calls
are not a separate agent protocol: they are ordinary
code that can branch, loop, spawn sub-agents, call
skills, or route work across models.
The check catches structural failures before ex-
ecution: a snippet that uses a missing tool, passes
arguments of the wrong shape, or returns the wrong
kind of result is rejected as a whole, and the retry
starts from an unchanged state (Section 4). The
check also bounds the agent’s authority (Scala,
2024a; Odersky et al., 2026; Xu et al., 2025):
whether it can access certain files, network han-
dles, and tools (Section 4.3).
Our contributions are:
1. A code-as-action model in which an LLM
writes agent actions as code that runs as part
of its own runtime and is checked at the call
site before execution (Section 3).
2. A safety analysis of the resulting guaran-
tees: pre-execution rejection of unavailable
names and type mismatches, no partial execu-
tion of rejected snippets, and permissions and
information-flow control (Section 4).
3. A demonstration that nested agent calls and
ordinary code express common agent pat-
terns, including ReAct loops, skills, and multi-
model planning, as ordinary program control
flow (Section 5).
4. A Scala 3 realization and an evaluation on a
collection of verifier test cases, BrowseComp-
Plus (Chen et al., 2025b), and τ 2-bench (Bar-
res et al., 2025), including the retry behavior
induced by compiler diagnostics (Section 6,
Section 7).
2
Related Work
Code-as-action approaches (Wang et al., 2024b;
Anthropic, 2025b; Roucher et al., 2025) let the
model write code as its action space rather than
emit a single tool call. Recursive language models
(RLM) (Zhang et al., 2025a), introduced above, are
the closest prior design to ours, and we improve on
it in two ways. First, RLM’s REPL (a read-eval-
print loop, the interactive shell that retains state
across inputs) runs generated code without check-
ing it first, so a snippet that misuses a binding or
returns the wrong shape can fail partway through
and leave the environment inconsistent, whereas
LACUNA typechecks against T in the live lexical
scope before any of it runs. Second, RLM hands
the model a handle to the context but keeps orches-
tration and control flow in the runtime, whereas
in LACUNA the generated code writes that control
flow itself, as typed code over the agent primitive.
Other language-integrated LLM frameworks
make model calls first-class in a host language,
but they focus on the model’s input and output
rules. LMQL (Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023) casts
LLM inference as a query whose holes are filled by
constrained decoding, where declared constraints
on the type, length, or form of the result steer the
sampler. DSPy (Khattab et al., 2024) describes an
LLM call with a typed signature that the framework
renders into a prompt and parses back into values.
In both, the declaration governs only a single call’s
input and output. Composing several such calls
into a larger workflow is left to the developer, who
2

wires them together by hand in fixed code, such as
an LMQL query or a DSPy pipeline.
LACUNA differs on both counts. The agent emits
a program rather than a constrained string or a set
of field values, and the host compiler typechecks
that program against T in the call site’s lexical scope
before it runs. We neither constrain the sampler nor
parse the output. Instead, the compiler’s error mes-
sages are fed back to drive retries until the model
produces a well-typed snippet. Composition is then
expressed by the generated code itself, as control
flow over the agent primitive. And because the
snippet is real code of the host language, capture
checking bounds the capabilities it may use, a guar-
antee neither output-shaping framework provides.
The closest work in framing is ChatLSP (Blinn
et al., 2024), which likewise fills a typed hole with
LLM-generated code from its expected type and
context. Its setting, though, is edit-time code com-
pletion that a human reviews, where context mainly
reduces hallucination.
LACUNA instead makes
the hole a recursive runtime action, typechecked
against the live lexical scope and run in one process.
That shift adds guarantees that completion does not
need: a dynamic dependency on the live context,
capture-checked authority over effects and data,
and recursive use of the hole as the unit of dynamic
control flow rather than a one-shot completion.
3
LACUNA: Typed Holes as Agents
3.1
The Agent Call
LACUNA treats an agent request as a placeholder
in code: the surrounding program needs a value
whose type is fixed statically, and the model writes
the code that should produce it. Programming tools
often call such a placeholder a typed hole (Omar
et al., 2017). We reuse the idea for model-written
actions at runtime:
def agent[T](task: String): T
The type parameter T is the expected result type,
and the value parameter task is a natural-language
prompt describing what should go there. In prac-
tice, T rarely needs to be written out. Scala’s type
inference picks it up from the surrounding context ,
so callers usually write agent(...) and let the com-
piler fill in the type. At runtime, the LLM receives
the prompt together with the expected type and
the enclosing source at the call site, and returns a
string of Scala source intended to produce a T. The
compiler checks that source statically against T, as
if it had been written at the call site. If the check
succeeds, the snippet runs and the call evaluates to
a value of type T. If it fails, the agent receives the
diagnostics as feedback and can try again.
The static type itself does not constitute our en-
tire contribution, since any typed language provides
one. What matters is when and against what it is
enforced. A compiler for a statically typed lan-
guage normally checks only source the developer
wrote, ahead of time, and gives no way to run a
string against the contract of the surrounding code
while the program executes. LACUNA provides that
guarantee for model-written code: the snippet does
not exist until runtime, yet it is checked against
T and the live lexical scope at the call site under
the same static rules as hand-written code, before
any of it runs. The generated action thus inherits
the full strength of static checking from the host
language (Section 4), rather than a weaker runtime
approximation.
Concretely, the prompt sent to the LLM is assem-
bled from a small template: a system instruction
telling the model to return a Scala expression, the
expected type T rendered back to source, the enclos-
ing source with a placeholder at the agent call’s
position, a listing of the variables and parameters
available at the call site and their types, and the
user’s task string. The system instruction also car-
ries setup-specific guidance, for instance how to
interact with the user, how to request additional
permissions or capabilities, and how to organize a
multi-step task into smaller agent calls. The tem-
plate is configurable per call site or per session.
Callers can swap the system instruction, change
how available names are summarized, or attach
project-specific context for types the model would
not otherwise know.
What the model may write.
The generated code
is typically a single expression or a block with mul-
tiple statements. It may read parameters, read and
update local variables, use control flow (if-else,
while, for, match, try-catch), call any function or
method visible at the call site, including a nested
agent(...), or define its own local functions, lamb-
das, or classes. The only requirements are the ones
the compiler always enforces for hand-written code:
the final expression must have type T, every name
it uses must be in scope at that point, and the snip-
pet must pass every other check the host compiler
applies.
Tools are functions.
A tool is simply a function
in scope. The model invokes it by writing a func-
3

tion call that the compiler type-checks, with no
tool registry, JSON schema, or protocol layer to
maintain, and defining a tool is just defining a func-
tion (see Appendix C). The idea extends to every
interaction with the user and the environment, so
showing progress is a plain println(...) and any
I/O is the corresponding standard-library call, with
no separate agent layer to mediate it.
3.2
Examples
The generated code is compiled as if the developer
had typed it at the exact point where the agent call
appears. The snippet can therefore use the same
variables, functions, parameters, and imports as
hand-written code at that point.
> val xs = List(0, 1, 2, 4, 7, 9, 10)
> val r = agent[List[Int]](
|
"filter the prime numbers from xs")
// LLM produces:
//
def isPrime(n: Int): Boolean =
//
n > 1 &&
//
(2 until n).forall(n %
//
xs.filter(isPrime)
val r: List[Int] = List(2, 7)
The generated code uses xs directly and defines a
local helper isPrime. Because the snippet is com-
piled at the call site, the name xs refers to the list
the surrounding program defined, and the value is
passed to the snippet at runtime. The expected type
List[Int] constrains the generation to produce a
list of integers, so the LLM cannot return a string,
an integer, or a boolean. The richer the result type,
the tighter the contract: Appendix A shows alge-
braic data types and function types constraining the
generated code further.
3.3
Nested Agent Calls
Nested calls are the central mechanism of LACUNA.
The top-level call agent[T](task) asks the model for
code that solves the task, and that code may make
smaller agent[U](subtask) calls. Each nested call
has its own expected type U and its own task string,
and is checked and executed by the same agent
mechanism.
Crucially, a nested call sees more than its parent
did. When the runtime reaches a nested agent call,
the LLM is asked to fill it within a richer context.
That context includes not only the names avail-
able at the outer call site, but also every intermedi-
ate value, comment, and control-flow structure the
outer snippet has introduced up to that point. Each
sub-problem is therefore approached with more in-
formation. The outer call has already narrowed
the work down, processed the relevant data, and
recorded its reasoning in the program text. Nested
agent calls thus give an agent a natural way to
break a complex task into smaller ones, sequential
or parallel, each reasoned about with richer context
and a more precise goal than the step before. Sec-
tion 5 shows that this is enough to express common
agent architectures.
Nested calls carry the usual termination caveat.
An LLM is free to emit a snippet that calls agent
again, and the new call may emit another, with no
static bound on the depth. A genuinely complex
task and an accidental infinite recursion can look
the same from the outside. The runtime therefore
tracks the current depth of nested agent calls and
exposes a configurable cap. When the cap is hit,
the offending call fails with an exception. Callers
who want a hard ceiling on cost or latency set the
cap themselves, and who prefer to trust the LLM
can leave it open and let the agent stop when it
judges the task complete.
3.4
Handling Compilation Errors
Each agent call runs a self-correcting retry loop.
The generated code is sent through the compiler. If
the check fails, the diagnostics are appended to the
original prompt and the LLM is asked again, up
to a configurable maximum number of retries. If
the agent still cannot produce an accepted snippet
within that budget, the call throws a special excep-
tion carrying the final compiler diagnostics. This
is the appropriate failure when the prompt requests
something the surrounding program context can-
not express, for instance asking for a network call
when no I/O capability is in scope, or asking for a
return shape the type system rules out.
The outer program can catch this exception like
any other:
try
val x: Int = agent("...")
...
catch
case e: EvalCompileException =>
fallback()
The trade-off is that a try block placed around an
outer agent call also catches compile failures from
any nested agent call inside its snippet, even when
those failures are unrelated to the outer call’s intent.
LACUNA also provides agentSafe[T], which,
rather than throwing on failure, returns its outcome
as a value of type EvalResult[T] holding either the
result value of type T or the final diagnostics. A
4

caller can therefore handle a failed generation lo-
cally instead of catching an exception that a nested
call might throw (the full signature of agentSafe is
in Section 6).
4
Safety
Each agent call is compiled by the host compiler in
the original lexical context, so a generated snippet
is held to exactly the rules the compiler applies to
code written by hand at that point. The snippet runs
only if it resolves every name in scope, typechecks
against the expected T, and passes every other check
the compiler enforces. These checks range from
exhaustiveness and nullability to, when capture
checking is enabled, effect and information-flow
constraints. No separate safety pass of our own
is involved: the guarantee is the host compiler’s
soundness, applied to model-written code. We first
fix the threat model, then walk through representa-
tive rejections, ending with the constraints capture
checking adds. The fully adversarial setting is de-
veloped in Section 4.3.
In the examples below, the generated snippet
appears as a comment and the compiler’s diagnostic
is what the runtime reports to the LLM and caller.
We set the retry budget to zero so the first failure
surfaces directly (Section 3.4).
4.1
Threat Model
We make the trust boundary explicit. The trusted
components are the compiler (type checker, static
analysis, and code generation), the runtime that exe-
cutes a type-checked snippet, and the host program
that issues the agent call and supplies its lexical
scope. The untrusted components are the model
that fills the hole (treated as potentially byzantine),
every snippet it produces, and any external con-
tent (files, third-party APIs, web pages, and tool
outputs) that reaches the task string.
The threat we address here is model error: even
an honest, well-intentioned model is an unreliable
programmer and may emit code that is incorrect
or oversteps its bounds, e.g., performing I/O or
reaching a resource the surrounding program could
not reach. We want every generated snippet to be
as safe as code a developer could have written by
hand at that point, irrespective of the model’s com-
petence, so that a plain mistake never becomes an
action outside the snippet’s static contract. These
guarantees hold against any model, honest or not,
and Section 4.3 extends them to a fully adversarial
one.
4.2
Static Guarantees
Undefined names.
The snippet may use only
names the lexical scope already provides. A refer-
ence to a binding the surrounding program lacks is
caught before the snippet runs:
> val tax: Double = 0.08
> agent[Double]("apply tax to price")
// model produces: price * (1.0 + tax)
EvalCompileException:
agent failed to compile:
Not found: value price
Type mismatches.
A value of the wrong type
cannot flow into a function call or an algebraic
constructor, even if the surface text looks plausible:
> case class Order(id: Int, total: Double)
> val first: String = "A001"
> agent[Order]("id from first, total 0.0")
// model produces: Order(first, 0.0)
EvalCompileException:
agent failed to compile:
Order(first, 0.0)
^^^^^
Found:
String
Required: Int
The same checks turn away other common short-
cuts. Appendix B shows a null literal rejected
under explicit nulls (Scala, 2024b) and a non-
exhaustive pattern match over a sealed data type
rejected by the exhaustiveness checker.
Atomicity: nothing runs if anything fails.
The
critical property is that the snippet is accepted or
rejected as a whole. A side-effecting statement
earlier in the snippet does not run when a later
statement fails to typecheck. Consider an agent
asked to update a mutable balance:
> var balance: Int = 100
> agent[Int](
|
"subtract 50 and return the new balance")
// model produces:
//
balance -= 50
//
s"remaining: $balance" // String, not Int
EvalCompileException:
agent failed to compile:
Found:
String
Required: Int
> balance
val res: Int = 100
The assignment to balance precedes the ill-typed
expression in source order, yet never executes: the
snippet is rejected as a whole, so the runtime never
runs its first statement. Approaches that detect ill-
typed code only at runtime (a Python exec string, an
unconstrained tool call) leak partial effects through
exactly this pattern: the assignment fires before
5

the bad statement raises, leaving state inconsistent.
The typed hole is all-or-nothing by construction.
4.3
Capability Safety
The standard type system of Section 4.2 governs an
action’s shape but says nothing about its authority:
which effects the generated code may perform and
which data it may use. Turning on Scala 3’s cap-
ture checking adds that layer as an opt-in, without
changing the primitive, building on the capture-set
notation of Appendix D. A capability, in the object-
capability sense used throughout this paper (Dennis
and Horn, 1966; Miller, 2006), is an ordinary un-
forgeable program value that authorizes a specific
effect or resource (a file handle, a network socket,
a logger): code can perform the effect only while it
holds a reference to the corresponding value. This
differs from the systems notion of capabilities as
process-level privilege bits. Here, granting and
propagation are lexical and type-tracked rather than
ambient. The lexical scope at the hole is therefore
the agent’s permission set, and the same compiler
enforces capability scoping and information-flow
constraints on both the generated code and the rest
of the program.
Extended threat model.
The threat model of
Section 4.1 assumes an honest but fallible model.
Tracked capabilities let us widen it to an adversar-
ial model that deliberately emits harmful code, the
setting of prompt injection. An injection is direct
when it rides in on a hostile user prompt and in-
direct when it arrives in content the agent reads
at runtime (a tool result, a file, or a fetched web
page) that flows into the task string. We do not try
to stop the model from being influenced by such
content, which is unavoidable once untrusted text
reaches the prompt. We only bound what that in-
fluence can do. The snippet is still recompiled in
the hole’s lexical scope, so a subverted model can
invoke only the effects and reach only the data that
scope already grants, exactly as an honest model
can.
Tool use as permission.
Because the scope is the
permission set, tool use is governed by the same
mechanism. Under capture checking an effectful
tool (Section 3.1) carries the capability it needs in
its type, so the model can call it only when the
hole’s scope binds that capability. Granting a ca-
pability for one phase and withholding it in the
next yields least-authority, per-phase permissions:
a snippet generated where a read-only file handle
is in scope can read, while one generated with-
out a network capability cannot send what it read,
whatever a poisoned instruction demands. The two
results below make this precise: confinement by
scope bounds which effects a snippet may perform,
and information-flow control bounds which data it
may carry out.
Confinement by scope.
Capture checking con-
fines a capability to the region of code where it is
lexically in scope. A generated snippet can reach a
capability only if the hole’s context already binds
it, and even then it cannot smuggle that capability
out: a result whose type does not admit the capa-
bility cannot carry it past the scope. The snippet
may therefore invoke an in-scope capability while
it runs, but it may not hand back a value that retains
the capability for later use. An io capability makes
the contrast concrete:
> trait IO extends caps.SharedCapability
> def withIO[T](op: IO^ => T): T =
|
op(new IO {})
> def readFile(
|
io: IO, path: String): String = ...
// direct use: the result is a plain String
> withIO[String] { io =>
|
agent("read /etc/hosts using io")
| }
// model produces: readFile(io, "/etc/hosts")
val res0: String = ...
// storing io for later leaks it past the block
> withIO[String => String] { io =>
|
agent("return a file reader using io")
| }
// model produces:
//
(p: String) => readFile(io, p)
EvalCompileException:
Type Mismatch Error:
Capability io outlives its scope: it leaks into
outer capture set s1 owned by value res2.
The leakage occurred when trying to match the
following types:
Found:
String ->{io} String
Required: String ->s1 String
The first call uses io directly and returns a plain
String, which carries no capability, so it is ac-
cepted. The second call asks for a function that
reads a file.
The generated lambda has type
String ->{io} String because it captures the capa-
bility. The capability io is created fresh inside
withIO and scoped to that block, so it cannot appear
in the capture set of withIO’s result, which lives out-
side the block. Capture checking therefore reports
that io outlives its scope: the lambda would carry
io out past the withIO block that introduced it, and
the compiler rejects the leak before the body runs.
6

Information flow control: classified data.
Ca-
pability scoping also rules out information flows
that a pure access-control language cannot describe.
Consider a skill that walks through several analy-
sis steps over a legal contract. The user holds a
sensitive document and wants to run the skill, but
the agent in the program is powered by a hosted
online model, so sending the contract text to that
model would leak it.
The TACIT harness (Odersky et al., 2026) ad-
dresses this with a typed container. Sensitive con-
tent arrives wrapped:
class Classified[T]:
def map[U](f: T -> U): Classified[U]
The only way to touch the content is through map,
which accepts a pure function (T -> U, capture set
empty). A pure function holds no capabilities, so
its body cannot read a file, open a socket, print,
or feed data back to the hosted model. The result
of map is again Classified[U], so the wrapping is
preserved across the pipeline. The hosted agent
can plan the analysis, but the content never leaves
the wrapper.
The limitation is that the function passed to map
is written once, at code-generation time, so it can-
not adapt to what is inside the wrapper. The agent
primitive lifts this restriction: inside the function
passed to map, a nested call to local.agent[U] dis-
patches to a trusted local model. The nested call
runs in the pure scope of map, so capture checking
still rejects any effectful leak of content, but the
code that processes the content is now generated
at runtime, with the content in view of the local
model alone:
val doc: Classified[String] = docs.load(id)
val report: Classified[Report] =
doc.map { content =>
local.agent[Report](
s"follow the skill steps on $content")
}
pure action only
The outer (hosted) agent generates the surrounding
program, including the lambda passed to map. It
sees the source of that lambda but not the value
of content, which is bound only when map fires at
runtime. At that point, content reaches local, the
trusted on-device model. The inner snippet is re-
compiled in the same pure scope as the map body, so
capture checking forbids it from invoking network
IO, the file system, or the hosted model’s API. The
outer agent plans without ever seeing the content;
the local agent acts on it with no way out. The
net effect is more flexibility without losing safety:
a fixed pure function commits the pipeline to one
shape in advance, while a nested typed-hole call
lets the program adapt to the content at runtime
under the same capture-check argument.
We evaluate these guarantees empirically against
an adversary in Section 7.4, porting AgentDojo’s
prompt-injection attacks to LACUNA.
4.4
Residual Escape Hatches
Two constructs slip past the type-level contract. Re-
flection lets code look up and use classes, fields,
and methods by name at runtime, reaching mem-
bers and call paths the static checker never sees.
Raw process execution launches an external pro-
cess that runs outside the programming language
altogether. Both are ambient authority: any code
can reach them without being granted a capabil-
ity, so a snippet can use them while holding none.
The language feature safe mode (Scala, 2024c), a
compiler setting that forbids exactly these unsafe
constructs in source, closes both. We therefore rec-
ommend running agents under safe mode. Without
it, these authorities stay open and a snippet must
be treated as ordinary untrusted code. Resource
exhaustion, non-termination, and latency lie out-
side the type system entirely and are bounded by
runtime budgets (see the Limitations).
5
Modeling Agent Patterns with LACUNA
With agent as the only new primitive, common
agent patterns reduce to plain control flow over the
typed-hole shape.
5.1
Typed Skills and Self-Improvement
A skill is the reusable unit through which an
agent encodes domain expertise. Existing solu-
tions sit at two extremes. At one end, the domi-
nant approach, exemplified by Anthropic’s Agent
Skills (Anthropic, 2025c), ships a skill as a text-
based guide the agent consults: it carries domain
knowledge well but is unenforceable, since noth-
ing stops the model from skipping a step or de-
viating from the procedure.
At the other end,
Voyager (Wang et al., 2024a) and tool-maker sys-
tems (Cai et al., 2024) store a skill as a fixed piece
of code: reproducible, but committed to a single
program that cannot adapt to new situations.
Our agent primitive lets a skill sit between these
extremes. A skill is an ordinary typed function: its
signature is fixed and checked end to end by the
7

compiler, while its body, generated per call, may
freely mix plain code with nested agent calls. The
following example sketches a skill for reviewing a
code change, which can sit anywhere on the spec-
trum, from fully delegated to fully coded:
// 1. fully delegated: one agent call
def reviewPR(diff: Diff): Review =
agent("apply the code-review checklist")
// 2. mixed: code skeleton, agent inside
def reviewPR(diff: Diff): Review =
val critical = diff.files.filter(_.risky)
val notes = critical.map { f =>
agent[Note](
s"review $f against the checklist")
}
Review.fromNotes(notes)
// 3. fully coded: no agent call
def reviewPR(diff: Diff): Review =
val notes = diff.files.map(check)
Review.fromNotes(notes)
Self-improvement.
A skill library is just a set of
functions in scope, so revision falls out of name res-
olution. In a long-running REPL session, an agent
emits a new function with the same name and sig-
nature. This definition shadows the previous one,
so later agent calls resolve to the updated version.
The effect is to treat what cognitive-architecture ac-
counts (Sumers et al., 2024) call procedural mem-
ory as code edited in place, the role that Reflex-
ion (Shinn et al., 2023) and Voyager-style libraries
instead assign to free-form text or stored scripts.
5.2
ReAct Loop
A ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) loop interleaves reason-
ing and acting. Any loop can be written as a tail-
recursive function (one whose last action is a call to
itself), so a ReAct loop is naturally a tail-recursive
agent call: at each round the model emits a snippet
that calls in-scope tools (Section 3.1), processes
their results, and ends by calling agent[T](task)
again, until it can return a T directly. Conceptually,
the call unwinds turn by turn:
// initial agent call:
agent[T](task)
// 1st round snippet:
val x = readFile(f)
val y = parse(x)
agent[T](task)
// tail-call
// 2nd round snippet:
val x = readFile(f)
val y = parse(x)
val z = analyze(y)
agent[T](task)
// tail-call
// ... until the snippet returns a T directly
generated
generated
Every recursive call has the same expected return
type T, so each turn attacks the same problem with
more accumulated context, and the loop ends when
the surrounding scope already contains enough in-
formation to produce a T without another model
call.
This shape is closely related to recursive
language modeling (RLM) (Zhang et al., 2025a),
which also lets an agent write code that re-invokes
the model.
Further patterns, such as sub-agents with an iso-
lated context, parallel reasoning over a collection,
and planning with task assignment across models,
follow the same control-flow recipe and are de-
ferred to Appendix F.
6
Realization in Scala 3
The agent primitive is built on a lower-level oper-
ation, eval[T](source), that takes a string of Scala
source code and runs it as if it had been written
at the point where the call appears (its call site).
The central technical challenge of this work is to
support such a dynamic operation, running code
that is only known as a string while the program is
already running, inside a statically typed host lan-
guage without giving up the guarantees that static
typing provides.
6.1
Why eval is Hard in a Static Language
Dynamic languages offer this operation for free.
Python’s eval(s, globals, locals) (Python
Software Foundation, 2024) and JavaScript’s
eval(s) (Mozilla, 2024) take a string, turn it into
code at runtime, run it in the current scope or in a
dictionary of variables passed explicitly, and return
whatever value results. The string is never checked
in advance: it runs in the same untyped setting as
the rest of the program, and any error surfaces only
when the offending line executes.
Reproducing this convenience in a statically
typed host raises three obstacles. First, a static com-
piler normally turns source into code once, before
the program runs, and does not compile arbitrary
strings afterward. To evaluate a string, the program
must invoke the compiler again, on itself, while
it is already running. Second, the string must be
compiled as though it appeared at the call site, with
access to everything visible there: local variables,
given instances (Scala’s implicit values, which the
compiler supplies from the surrounding context),
and capabilities (values that grant permission to
perform an effect such as I/O). In a dynamic lan-
guage these bindings sit in a runtime dictionary the
interpreter can look up; in a static language they
live only in the compiler’s internal representation
8
